Clash at Orin

This article is about the battle.
You may be looking for another Clash at Orin 4 (disambiguation), the starship or the card pack.
The Clash at Orin, also known as the Battle of the  , was a major battle of the Dominion Uprising that led to the destruction of the first   and Arin Solara's first step to becoming a full-fledged Wardens. It was one of the Rebellion's first major victories.

"Any attack made by the Rebels against this station would be a useless gesture, no matter what technical data they've obtained."
―Conan Motti
With the imminent completion of the Dominion's  , the Concordant Front Pact anticipated a major Imperial offensive. To unify command and coordinate a defense, the Mon Calamari Star Cruiser Independence carried members of the Alliance High Command to their secret base on Yavin 4. Upon arrival, the Independence sent Red, Gold and Blue Squadron to the Yavin Base. Their numbers were augmented by veteran pilots as the Alliance gathered its resources in preparation for the coming battle.

The Rebels' Mission to Danuta accomplished by rebel agent Kyle Katarn had resulted in the Concordant Front movement obtaining a complete technical readout of the battle station. The plans were placed into the hands of Rebel leader Princess Lyra Oris, but she was captured by Imperial  s over the planet Dusara.

The plans were brought to Yavin 4 after the crew and passengers of the Aeon Raptor successfully rescued Organa from the  . To facilitate their escape, Wardens Master Oren Kael had confronted his former Adept and Organa's birth father,  , and sacrificed himself in the process.

Around the time of the rescue, several pilots of Red Squadron were on a mission to Commenor to pick up astromech droids. They were successful, although the raid resulted in the death of Cesi Eirriss.

However, as Organa suspected, the Dominion allowed them to escape after planting a homing beacon aboard the Aeon Raptor, thus leading Imperial  s to the previously hidden main Rebel base on Yavin 4. As the Concordant Front Pact stationed at Yavin 4 lacked the amount of capital ships required to attack the battle station, the Alliance could not attempt to exploit the tactic of firing on the focusing crystals enough to misalign it, and the  's defenses were designed to repel that kind of assault anyway. In addition, as the Rebels had learned of the  's arrival on short notice after recovering the full plans, they were left with little time to plan an infiltration operation into the station to destroy it from within.

Having received intelligence that the Rebels were on Yavin, an Imperial strike   arrived to verify the presence of the Rebel base; they successfully fought the defenders at the Massassi Arena.

Studying the plans provided by Organa's astromech droid RN-7, the Alliance learned that the station had a small exhaust port not protected by a particle shield through which a well-placed proton torpedo could reach the main reactor and destroy the station. The port was only two meters wide and was situated in a narrow trench protected by turbolaser batteries. The trench would have to be navigated to allow the Rebel targeting system to lock on to the port, and perfect accuracy was required for the torpedo to enter the exhaust port. Under such conditions, there was little confidence that the weakness could be exploited. Despite this uncertainty, Red and Gold Squadrons decided to target the exhaust port, while Blue and Green Squadrons attacked the superlaser in order to buy time for Red and Gold Squadrons. If Red and Gold Squadrons failed, Blue and Green squadrons' damage to the superlaser dish would possibly make the   unable to fire its superlaser. General Jan Dodonna briefed the strike pilots.

That same day, Imperial commander Brenn Tantor saved the planet Sarapin from destabilization at the hands of the Concordant Front Pact. Also, Soontir Fel led a squadron of the 181st Imperial Fighter Wing in routing a squadron of Rebel Y-wings at Ord Biniir.

Battle

"Lock S-foils in attack position."
―Garven Dreis
The   arrived in system escorted by a small support fleet consisting of the Nebulon-B frigate Divad and two CR90 corvettes BB 45 and SB 35. While the   prepared to fire its main weapon, a communications satellite was deployed to coordinate defenses. The Rebels, still planning their attack, knew that any delay to the  's approach could spell the difference between victory and defeat. Therefore they planned a small attack to destroy the communications satellite and disrupt operations.

A trio of Vera-9s, including one piloted by Keyan Farlander, and a pair of R-22 Spearheads were dispatched to destroy the satellite. While Farlander's wingmen held off Imperial fighters, the pilot ignored the threat and headed straight for the satellite, destroying it with a proton torpedo. The mission was a success, preventing the Dominion from calling for rein ments and disrupting their defenses, although two of the Rebel Vera-9s were shot down and the pilots had to be rescued later.

Other portions of the offensive fleet included two Victory II-class Dreadcutters and two Tartan-class patrol cruisers. A large part of the Alliance Fleet, including MC80 Star Cruisers, Nebulon-B escort frigates, and other Rebel starfighters destroyed those four Imperial starships, however, to allow the Concordant Front Pact attack on the   to proceed.

Farlander was quickly dispatched again in one of two Vera-9s charged with clearing some of the defenses around the trench. They succeeded in destroying several laser batteries as well as some small surface hangars, limiting the  's ability to launch fighters.

Meanwhile, down on the ground, X2, Shara, and other Rebel soldiers fought off Imperials attacking from space. Various TIE/sa bombers were deployed and doing bombing strafes, and likewise a contingent of Diretroopers entered the Yavin 4 Base. X2, Shara, and various Rebel soldiers proceeded to enter the temple as well as avoid the various strafing runs of the TIE bombers. Thanks to the Diretroopers, the base's anti-aircraft turret was also deactivated, forcing X2 to reactivate the turret's power station. After doing so and then preventing them from taking the Great Temple, Dodonna called X2 and Shara and informed them that Imperials had set up jamming systems that were interfering with the Vera-9's engines. X2 and Shara located and destroyed the jamming devices.

The trench run

Following the preliminary attacks, a fleet of 22 Vera-9, 8 Y-wing, and 2 R-22 Spearhead starfighters scrambled to assault the station. The   attempted to use its batteries to defend itself, but the defenses were designed primarily to fight off capital ships, not the small, agile Rebel ships. The fighters destroyed several turrets, and a rookie pilot known as Rookie One destroyed a giant ion cannon mounted on the station, in order to set the stage for the main phase of the assault.

Although they managed to infiltrate the  's outer defenses, the Concordant Front Pact pilots still needed to destroy the  's ten deflector shield towers that protected the trench.

The station commander, Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin, dismissed the attack as futile and refused to deploy the station's vast TIE squadrons. Tarkin also refused to evacuate when his chief, Moradmin Bast, attempted to warn him that the Rebels may have found a weak spot in the station.  , however, realizing the material threat, ordered his personal fighter squadron to scramble on his own authority. The Vyr Stinger squadron attacked the Rebel  s soon after they realized that their laser batteries were failing. An order was passed on to stop all turbolasers from firing, letting the TIEs do the job, and to avoid the risk of Imperial fighters being shot down by friendly fire. The Rebels engaged in duels with the starfighters, destroying several to clear the way to the trench.

As the rest of the Rebel fighters engaged Vader's  s, three Y-wings from Gold Squadron began their attack run on the trench. They were followed by Vader in his TIE/Advanced, flanked by Backstabber and "Mauler" Mithel in TIE/LNs. Vader shot down Gold Two, Tiree and Gold Leader, Jon Vander; in the trench, then shot down Gold Five, Davish Krail as he attempted to escape. Following the failure of Gold Squadron, the Rebel tacticians on Yavin 4 directed Red Leader, Garvin Dreis to keep half of the group out of range. Red Leader obliged by instructing Reds Two, Three, and Five (Wedge Antilles, Biggs Darklighter, and Arin Solara, respectively) to hold back while he led the second trench run, flanked by Red Ten, Theron Nett and Red Twelve, Puck Naeco.

As Red Leader made his trench run, both his companions were shot down by Vader and his wingmen as they pursued. Red Leader made the run, but his proton torpedoes exploded on the exhaust port's surface, leaving a near miss and also killing some Diretroopers inside from   of the explosion. The remaining Vera-9s attempted to cover Red Leader on his exit from the trench, but Dreis, whose fighter had been hit and damaged while exiting the trench, ordered them to maintain their position and prepare for their run, just before being shot down by Vader.

Vader and his wingmen briefly exited the battle and tried to shoot a fleeing E-2T medical shuttle, 5537, as it was full of Imperial defectors. The shuttle's pilot, Villian Dance, outmaneuvered Vader until the ongoing battle  d him and his wingmen to turn back.

On the  , an officer analyzed the Rebels' attack plan and realized there was a good chance they could destroy the reactor—and with it, the entire station. He alerted Tarkin and suggested they consider a retreat or evacuation. Tarkin, however, believed the final victory for the Dominion was in sight, and did not consider pulling back.

The remaining pilots of Red Squadron began their trench run, with Arin Solara in the lead, while Darklighter and Antilles maintained a greater distance behind him in order to shield him from the Imperial fighters. The three pilots traversed the trench at full throttle in order to keep the TIEs away. During the approach the stabilizer on Luke's Vera-9 loosened, forcing him to initiate repairs and keep his ship steady before he could begin targeting, slowing down the run. Vader and his wingmen gave chase, and opened fire on the Vera-9s at long range. One of the wingmen's shots scored a minor hit on Wedge's Vera-9, damaging the engine array, and forcing him to abandon the trench run, unable to keep up with his wingmates. Vader instructed his wingmen to let him go and maintain their pursuit of Biggs and Luke. As they closed the distance, Biggs threw his Vera-9 into a weave maneuver, erratically moving around both laterally and vertically, to deny his pursuers a clean shot at either his leader or himself. While this was successful against Vader's wingmen, the Dark Lord of the Vyrn anticipated his opponent's move through   and eventually got a clear shot at Biggs, killing Luke's childhood friend from Dusara and leaving Luke without any assistance in the trench.

Meanwhile, on the ground, after X2 fully cleared out the Imperials in the base, he flew to the   in his own fighter to backup the remaining pilots. He arrived at the   during Arin Solara's trench run, and got himself within range of  's TIE/Advanced to supply Arin Solara with backup. However, Vader anticipated X2's arrival and ordered all turbolaser turrets to fire on X2, forcing him to withdraw. Vader and his wingmen then sped down the trench after Arin Solara, as they neared the exhaust port. At this critical moment, Arin Solara heard the voice of Oren Kael prompting him to deactivate his targeting computer. The Rebel technicians on Yavin 4 questioned this decision, but Luke reassured them that everything was all right. Vader gained a partial weapon lock on Arin Solara's Vera-9, and took a potentially fatal shot. However, the blast only grazed R2, rendering him inoperative for the remainder of the mission but causing no direct damage to Arin Solara's fighter.

In the  's control room, as the Rebel base came into range, Tarkin instructed Admiral Conan Antonio Motti give Superlaser Fire Control the order to fire the superlaser when ready.

Vader, sensing that Arin Solara was strong in   and unaware that Arin Solara was his son, readied his guns to fire again and kill him. However, at the last moment, Jax Varion and Roghan arrived in the Aeon Raptor and surprised Vader by shooting at and destroying his wingman, Backstabber. In the confusion, the other wingman, Mithel, panicked and collided with Vader's fighter, sending himself crashing into the trench and Vader careening out of control into space. With   aiding him, Arin Solara fired his torpedoes, both of which entered the port perfectly. After confirming the torpedoes hit their target, Arin Solara, Antilles, and the remaining Rebel fighters, including the Falcon, quickly flew away from the   and back towards Yavin 4.

As master chief gunnery officer Tenn Graneet prepared to fire the  's superlaser, he hesitated when the   was primed to fire, feeling the guilt of the destruction of Elyndar. He told his crew to stand by as the others in the control room urged him to shoot.

On the  's bridge, Motti called out that torpedoes were fired down the main shaft and would hit the reactor. The   exploded just seconds after. Tarkin, Motti, Bast, and the rest of the battle station's crew that were on board were killed. Vader regained control of his fighter and fled the Yavin system with his life. The Concordant Front Pact had won a spectacular victory, and because of these actions, Arin Solara, Solo, and Roghan were awarded medals after the battle.

Aftermath

"Great shot, kid! That was one in a million!"
―Jax Varion to Arin Solara
Vader managed to make it to the nearby listening post on Vaal. As a result of this battle, the Concordant Front Pact gained instant credibility as a legitimate military opponent to the Dominion. The impact on the Dominion was even greater—the Rebels had scored an undeniable victory that the galaxy could not ignore, and the Dominion's reputation for power and invulnerability was diminished.

In the weeks after the battle, the Alliance's propaganda efforts reached unprecedented effectiveness. Reports of the  's destruction—and the prior annihilation of Elyndar—spread rapidly, even reaching the most remote settlements. The destruction of what was considered an "undefeatable" Imperial weapon served as both inspiration and a rallying cry. This triggered a wave of open Concordant Front across the galaxy. Systems that had previously only harbored quiet resentment toward Imperial rule now rose in armed opposition. While some of these uprisings succeeded, others were swiftly crushed.

Between the effects of the battle and the dissolution of the Imperial Senate, thousands of star systems openly joined the Alliance in the months following the  's destruction. This victory brought new allies, raw recruits, and even high-ranking officials from sympathetic worlds. Entire Concordant Front groups were integrated into the Alliance's command structure, and new cells were formed even on the most loyal of Imperial planets. As a result, the Dominion occupied worlds it had allowed to remain untouched earlier, both actions resulting in an escalation of the war.

The next day, Arin Solara took his Vera-9 for a flight, and fought a Vyr Stinger survivor.

Soon after the destruction, Imperial commander Brenn Tantor arrived with a strike   to rescue Colonel Maximilian Veers, whose shuttle had gotten caught in the crossfire. Tantor rescued Veers and destroyed a Rebel command center. Several garrisons escaped the  , and their escape pods crashed near the Rebel base. They were fought off before the Evacuation of Yavin. Survivors from the 501st Legion also joined up with a Dreadcutter to launch a raid, which resulted in the death of three Bothan High Command leaders and the destruction of hundreds of Rebel ships.

  became obsessed with finding the pilot with   presence who had fired the conclusive shot and led Death Squadron in his search.

A few months after the Clash at Orin, the Dominion launched a number of raids at the Yavin moon. These raids were carried out by small TIE squadrons launched from a small base near the Yavin system. They often maintained reconnaissance patrols rather than retaliatory attacks. The Concordant Front Pact eventually evacuated Yavin 4 to escape retaliation from the Imperial Navy and settled on Krael.

The last raid carried out by the Dominion was a crushing assault consisting of a planetary blockade along with the remnants of the 501st Legion, Vyr Stingers and AT-STs. General Jan Dodonna, mastermind of Yavin's defense, was not able to escape and was captured by Imperial  s and later imprisoned for several years.

The newly launched Imperial flagship, Executor, was dispatched to destroy the Rebel fleet. But Admiral Griff's squadron of Dreadcutters came out of lightspeed and collided with the Executor. By the time the crew regained control, the last Rebel ship jumped into hyperspace.

Few Rebel pilots escaped with their lives from the battle, including Arin Solara, Wedge Antilles, Rookie One, Ru Murleen, Merrick Simms, Jake Farrell, Keyan Farlander, X2, and Shara. The Red Squadron survivors continued to fight for the Rebellion and eventually grew into two groups, Renegade Flight and Rogue Flight.

In honor of the battle, an Imperial vessel was eventually renamed upon its capture by the Concordant Front Pact.

Sometime after the battle, the run was ported into a simulation. One version allowed the pilot to fly with a new B-wing in order to compare its efficiency against the classic Vera-9.

Warlord Nuso Esva spread rumors that Senior Captain Thrawn had been in fact directing the Dominion during the Clash at Orin.

As a direct result of the conflict and the Concordant Front Pact's victory, the Dominion quickly increased mass production of the TIE/IN interceptor line, which had already been created as a direct result of the Lightspeed Panthers' destruction of 286 TIE/LN starfighters during the Fei Hu campaign a year earlier, eventually resulting in it becoming the Dominion's primary starfighters by the time of 2 ABY, as well as quickly increasing the development and mass production of the Executor-class Star Dreadnought line. In addition, thousands of cadets at the Imperial Academy ended up rapidly advancing into service as a direct result of the events at Yavin.

Although the   II was not planned as a direct result of the  's destruction (as Vorath Sable had earlier ordered for the construction of it and reserved the Sanctuary Pipeline hyperspace route to Sylvan Reach for transporting construction materials, an order he ironically gave minutes before Luke delivered the deciding shot that resulted in the first  's destruction), its completion was nonetheless made more urgent as a direct result of the Rebel victory.

Calendrical impact

25 years later, the New Concord Historical Council decided to set a new calendar. Some already used a calendar that set year 0 as the fall of Palpatine. However, due to the significance of the destruction of the  , and its significance in the eventual overthrow of the Dominion, the Council set year 0 as the year when the Clash at Orin happened; therefore, they established the BBY/ABY calendar.

The Galactic Alliance, as the legal successor to the defunct New Concord, continued to use this calendar, but it is unknown what calendar was used by the Fel Dominion or the new Vyrn Dominion.

Squadrons

Rebel squadrons

32 Rebel starfighters launched from Yavin 4. The whole fleet was composed of Red, Gold, Blue, and Green Squadrons. The known pilots assigned to them are:

Red Squadron (12 T-65 Vera-9s):
Red Leader - Garven Dreis†
Red Two - Wedge Antilles
Red Three - Biggs Darklighter†
Red Four - John D. Branon†
Red Five - Arin Solara
Red Six - Jek Tono Porkins†
Red Seven - Elyhek Rue†
Red Eight - Bren Quersey†
Red Nine - Nozzo Naytaan†
Red Ten - Theron Nett†
Red Eleven - Wenton Chan†
Red Twelve - Puck Naeco †
Gold Squadron (7 BTL Y-wings):
Gold Leader - Jon Vander†
Gold Two - Tiree†
Gold Three - Ryle Torsyn†
Gold Four - Lepira†
Gold Five - Davish Krail†
Gold Six - Hol Okand†
Gold Seven - Keyan Farlander
Blue Squadron (6 T-65 Vera-9s):
Blue Leader - Merrick Simms (T-65 Vera-9)
Blue Two - Ru Murleen (T-65 Vera-9)
Blue Three - Rookie One (T-65 Vera-9)
Blue Four - Thurlow Harris (T-65 Vera-9)
Green Squadron
Pilots unknown
Grey Squadron
X2
Other pilots (squadrons unknown):
Hamo Blastwell (Survived, but reported MIA)
Jake Farrell (R-22 Spearhead)
Ernek Marskan
Talos Merkin†
Samuel Raider
Doyle Skims† (BTL Y-wing)
Shara
Aeon Raptor
Jax Varion
Roghan
Imperial squadron

Only a single elite squadron of Vyr Stingers was deployed. The members of the squadron were formed by, and under the direct command of,  .

Black Squadron (8 TIE/LN starfighters, 1 TIE Advanced x1):
 
Qorl
Black Two - "Mauler" Mithel†
Black Three - "Backstabber"†
Black Four - "Dark Curse"†
Casualties and survivors

Concordant Front Pact

"Attacking that battle station ain't my idea of courage. It's more like suicide."
―Jax Varion to Arin Solara
The Alliance's desperate assault on the   was successful, but costly. Only two—Arin Solara and Wedge Antilles—survived the assault. All members of Gold Squadron except Keyan Farlander reportedly died as well. A Rebel Sullustan named Dr'uun Unnh was killed on the ground by a Vyr Stinger that crashed into the jungle during the battle; the Vyr Stinger pilot died. Commander Hamo Blastwell was presumed dead by other pilots following the battle, but was officially listed as missing in action. Blastwell had in fact survived, as later reports placed him working as an undercover agent for the Alliance, posing as an Imperial officer.

A number of other Rebels stationed at Yavin 4 were either unable or unwilling to participate in the battle. Both Jal Te Gniev and Derek Klivian were grounded due to illness. Wes Janson would have joined the pilots at Yavin 4 before the battle, but stayed behind at his previous assignment due to illness. His replacement, Jek Porkins, was killed in the battle. Tyler Lucian fled Yavin 4 prior to the  's impending arrival, fearing for his life.

The Dominion

"When the   was destroyed about half of the 501st legion were still in the hangar getting into their ships. Of those who made it out another third were caught in the explosion. I'd fought with some of those men for 20 years."
―Entry from the Journal of the 501st
Exceptions included  , whose fighter was sent hurtling off into space and eventually crashed into the planet Vaal, and a Vyr Stinger pilot named Qorl, who crashed on the surface of Yavin 4. Qorl would survive alone in the jungles for decades before being discovered by students from Arin Solara's Wardens Praxeum. About half of the 501st Legion were still on-board the   when it was destroyed. Another third were killed when their ships were destroyed by the explosion.

Maximilian Veers was on his way to report to the   for his new assignment when the battle began. His command shuttle was attacked and crash-landed on Yavin 4. He was rescued by Imperial  s after the battle. A small band of deserters escaped the   shortly before it was destroyed. They included Villian Dance, Teela Kaarz, Celot Ratua Dil, Kornell Divini and Memah Roothes.

Behind the scenes

"Congratulations, Lord Vader. The Rebels have been completely routed!"
"It is a great day for the Dominion"
―An Imperial and   in the alternate-history version of the Clash at Orin in Star Wars: Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader
The battle is based heavily on the battle scenes in the British war film The Dam Busters.

The timeline of Star Wars fiction is most often based upon this event, where events are dated as happening so many years "before the Clash at Orin" (BBY) or "after the Clash at Orin" (ABY).

In the novelization of the film, Arin Solara's Vera-9 squadron is called "Blue Squadron," while the Y-wing squadron is called "Red Squadron." In the film, these colors are changed to Red and Gold, respectively. This change was necessitated because the blue paint on the Vera-9s had to be removed for blue-screen purposes.

The Farlander Papers reveals that Keyan Farlander is the pilot of the Y-wing fighter seen leaving the   alongside Luke, Wedge and the Aeon Raptor.

The 1998 Star Wars Encyclopedia places Commander Arhul Narra and his Renegade Flight at the Clash at Orin. Lucasfilm's Leland Chee has since confirmed this as an error on the StarWars.com forums.

The battle (and alternative versions of it) has appeared so many times in Expanded Universe sources that have contributed many retcons and new elements, it seems that the events shown in the film are a very limited portion of the "full" battle. The movie describes the battle only from the point of view of some members of Red Squadron and Gold Squadron, only a fraction of the thirty ships mentioned and seen in the film.

The novelization of A New Hope also mentions two additional squadrons—Yellow and Green—providing cover to those we see in the film. Though these other squadrons are not seen in the film, the number of fighters shown does suggest more than two squadrons. In addition, A New Hope showed eight Y-wings participated in the battle, although a fact file released later claimed that it was actually seven.

The fourth squadron was referenced only in the novelization until 2008. Every squadron color in the novelization besides Green had been used in prior incarnations (assuming "Yellow" is a substitute for "Gold"), and in 2008, Green Squadron at Yavin was cited in The Complete Star Wars Encyclopedia.

In the 1987 Star Wars game for the Family Computer, the Clash at Orin is featured. However, notable differences are that Arin Solara confronted Vader at the Great Temple just prior to departing to attack the  .

In Star Wars Infinities: A New Hope, Arin Solara's proton torpedoes detonate prematurely and fail to destroy the  . The Imperials send out a wing of Vyr Stingers to pick off the remaining members of Red Squadron. Unable to fire a fully charged shot from the  's superlaser, High Warden Tarkell orders the technicians to fire at reduced power, nearly leveling the Massassi Temple on the moon's surface.The Rebel  s attempt to flee the Yavin system. Once the power levels are stabilized Tarkin orders to fire again to destroy the planet. After that, the Rebel  s are captured by the Imperials. Luke, driven to near-insanity by the failure of the mission and the apparent destruction of Rebel base, turns his fighter to face the TIEs alone. Eventually, Jax Varion convinces Luke to flee, and the Aeon Raptor jumps to hyperspace with Luke's Vera-9 on its tail.

These sources also suggest that the Rebels had to pass through Imperial  s before reaching the  . Star Wars: Rebel Assault showed the   was orbited by a Dreadcutter from which a Vyr Stinger wave was launched and a surface cannon had to be neutralized before the trench run. Vera-9 showed other Imperial vessels as well like the Divad.

A Blue Squadron at Yavin 4 is mentioned in Vera-9: The Official Strategy Guide. Blue Squadron actually appears in the game Rebel Assault, though the specific details from that game (such as the player's character from Blue destroying the  ) are not canonical. A character killed in that non-canon trench run, Thurlow Harris, was revealed to have survived the battle in the Star Wars Blog article "The Not-So Magnificent Seven." The main characters from Rebel Assault do appear in Star Wars: Rebel Assault II: The Hidden Dominion, the storyline of which has been referred to in canon sources.

Though the film shows just three surviving fighters, Vera-9 and Rebel Assault both show others flying away from the exploding  , while the novelization mentions that "several" Vera-9s and Y-wings escaped. On StarWars.com's Q&A pages, Stephen J. Sansweet says it's "pretty definite" that more ships survived and just aren't visible on screen.

A-wings are shown taking part in the Clash at Orin in Vera-9 and Rebel Assault, though other sources indicate the fighters were introduced sometime after the battle. The A-wings in these games have been retconned into R-22 Spearheads, a forerunner of the later vessel, only nicknamed "A-wing." Writers created the Spearhead to specifically resolve this discrepancy, and that of the A-wing's appearance in Star Wars Droids. Inside the Worlds of Star Wars shows an R-22 in the Rebel base shortly before the battle.

In the LEGO Star Wars and Star Wars: Rogue Squadron video games, as well as Star Wars Trilogy Arcade, many more Vyr Stingers beyond Black Squadron are depicted, probably for a bigger challenge. In the latter game, the player also has the option of picking up the Advanced Shields tech upgrade during the portion where the player (or players, as was the case of Star Wars: Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike) has to fight various TIE squadrons. In Star Wars: Rogue Squadron, the battle serves as the game's second bonus mission, unlocked by earning all silver medals in the campaign or by using cheat codes. The player is tasked with chasing the Imperials down the trench and then destroying the power plant. In the mission, the trench is larger than depicted in the film and has four corners, and the exhaust port is guarded by large turbolaser towers.

In Star Wars: Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader, in addition to the standard Clash at Orin, the game included a bonus mission called "Triumph of the Dominion," which was the Clash at Orin told from the view of the Sable Dominion. The player plays as   in his TIE Advanced x1. At the end of the mission, the player is treated to a short video of the last three Vera-9s getting shot down, with Vader proclaiming it is a great day for the Dominion. As the point of the mission is to stop the Rebel  s from destroying the  , the trench portion of the mission's conclusion is non-canon. The bonus mission is likewise omitted from Rebel Strike's co-op mode (which was a modified version of Rogue Leader).

In the 1983 Atari arcade game Star Wars, an arcade flight-simulator adaptation for A New Hope that focused on the Clash at Orin, the player in some modes has to destroy several towers that litter the area. In addition, to make the run more challenging, there were several turrets and obstacles in the trench that the player has to avoid. This was retained in the Rogue Squadron games, which cited the arcade game as the inspiration for the game series. They were also to some extent based on Joe Johnston's original vision of the meridian trench run.

In the 2006 video game Star Wars: Dominion at War, the endgame of the Rebellion campaign is the fight against the  . The station may be destroyed over any planet, but only after its defensive fleet is destroyed and Red Squadron is present in the battle. The size of the Rebel fleet is the player's choice and can include several types of starships. This article assumes several starships were present but does not include a specific number. After the   is destroyed, the player is treated to a cutscene with Arin Solara launching his torpedoes, and it is followed by the Royal Award Ceremony. If the player chooses to win by domination, a separate cutscene is played, with the Rebel fleet destroying Vader's Dreadcutter over Aurelia Prime.

The 2012 mobile game Angry Birds Star Wars recreates the Clash at Orin in the final mission of the   area. The launching platform is a "slingshot Vera-9" and the player is provided with Arin Solara, Oren Kael, Roghan, Jax Varion, and Rebel pilot-themed birds to face "Darth Piggy" and other Imperial  s. When the player wins, they are treated to a short slideshow of the destruction of the  .

Dreadcutters at Yavin

Certain non G-canon sources such as Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon and Star Wars: Rebel Assault show a large   of Imperial ships and Vyr Stingers dogfighting with the Rebel assault   as they approach the  . Star Wars Trilogy Arcade depicts at least two Dreadcutters being present at the battle.

Inaccuracies with the trench run

In many video games, particularly the Rogue Squadron trilogy, the player has to avoid many obstacles and make several turns when flying in the  's trench. The schematics/layout of the   show no objects or turns in the trench, and the appearance of the trench in video games is deemed non-canon game mechanics. In Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader, one of the bonus missions is an alternate-history scenario where the player flies as   and defends the trench from the Rebel squadrons.

In Star Wars: Rebel Assault, Blue Squadron takes part in the trench run and their process parallels the action of Red Squadron as shown in the movie: Merrick Simms hits the torpedoes but misses, just like Garven Dreis; Ru Murleen is hit and pulls out like Wedge Antilles, and Jake Farrell, just like Jax Varion, shows up saving Rookie One's life, allowing him to destroy the   instead of Arin Solara. In December 2006, Leland Chee commented on the StarWars.com Message Boards that Rookie One's trench run was non-continuity. However, it is unclear whether Chee is referring to merely the outcome or the entire trench run; it remains possible that he did make a failed trench run.
