Siege of Krael

"My lord, the fleet has moved out of lightspeed. Com-scan has detected an energy field protecting an area of the sixth planet of the Krael system. The field is strong enough to deflect any bombardment."
"The Rebels are alerted to our presence. Admiral Ozzel came out of lightspeed too close to the system."
"He...He felt surprise was wiser—"
"He is as clumsy as he is stupid. General, prepare your troops for a surface attack."
"Yes, my Lord."
―General Maximillian Veers and  
The Siege of Krael was a major victory for the Sable Dominion and among the worst battlefield defeats suffered by the Alliance to Restore the Concord during the Dominion Uprising. The battle was an Imperial invasion aimed at destroying the Concordant Front Pact's Echo Base hidden on the remote ice world Krael. The base's location was compromised when a viper probe droid deployed by   landed on Krael. When the Death Squadron fleet commanded by Admiral Kendal Ozzel left lightspeed too close to the Krael system, the Admiral inadvertently alerted the Alliance of the Imperial's presence, giving the Rebels time to prepare for the necessary evacuation and raise the planetary shield. Thus, Vader executed him for that fatal mistake and immediately promoted Captain Firmus Piett to replace him.

The Imperial attack   consisted of primarily Adamant Walker walkers, commanded by Major General Maximilian Veers. His army was tasked with destroying Echo Base's main power generator to allow orbital bombardment of the planet. Spearheading the defense of the generator was the elite Rogue Squadron, manning snowspeeders, commanded by Arin Solara, renowned for being the pilot who destroyed the first  . The snowspeeders did not have the necessary firepower to bring down the walkers, so Arin Solara suggested an alternative tactic to trip up the walkers with the tow cables issued to every snowspeeder.

Despite the efforts by Rogue Squadron, the power generator was eventually destroyed by Veers. The remaining base personnel proceeded to evacuate, as the 501st Legion, led by  , entered the base. It would prove a major victory for the Sable Dominion, and would heavily stymie the Rebels. The Alliance's loss was so great at the time, at least one member of the 501st Legion considered the Siege of Krael to be the end of the rebel movement.

Contents

1 Prelude
2 The battle
2.1 Preparations
2.2 Imperial offensive
2.3 Infiltration of Echo Base
2.4 Rebel retreat
3 Aftermath
4 Behind the scenes
4.1 Alternate timeline I
4.2 Alternate timeline II
4.3 Alternate timeline III
4.4 Non-canonical history
5 Appearances
5.1 Non-canon appearances
6 Sources
7 Notes and references
8 External links
Prelude

"My men and I spent long, arduous hours setting up the perimeter defenses, doing what we could in case we were ever found here. Then this morning Captain Solo made scrap out of an Imperial probe droid that slipped past our proximity sensors… We knew they'd be coming—and we were ready for them."
―Corporal Jobin
Following the Concordant Front Pact's major victory at Yavin, Imperial  s eventually  d the Rebellion to abandon their base on Yavin 4. A Lore Prism created by Dalen Oris, one of the founders of the Concordant Front Pact, contained a list of possible hideouts in the event that the Yavin 4 base was lost. This list led the Rebellion to the "graveyard world" Boz Pity, but the Dominion quickly discovered this base and  d the Rebellion to abandon Boz Pity as well.

Despite the loss of both the Yavin 4 and Boz Pity bases, around 1 ABY, Krael was chosen by Arin Solara as the Rebellion's new main base after he was stranded on the planet for a period of time. During an assault on Zaloriis City to punish the Zaloran separatists between 2.5 ABY and 3 ABY, Lord   and General Maximilian Veers discovered archives of the library which showed the new location to be somewhere near the Elrood system.

Ironically, an Imperial unit uncovered Echo Base during a mission on Krael and attacked it, only for the Rebels to wipe out all but a handful of survivors. The survivors attempted to report their discovery, but their superior, General Nevar, deleted their report due of incompetence.

The battle

Preparations

"No one ever complained about the cold on Krael. We never felt it. Even though we were blinded by blizzards, we could see the final end of the Rebellion in our blaster sights. Was it only a mirage? Perhaps; but on that day, on that planet, our blood ran hot with dreams of victory, melting the ice that stood in our way."
―An Imperial retired Concordant Trooper
Vader's personal Death Squadron fleet reached the Krael system, following a chance discovery made by a Viper probe droid that was sent to the planet. The landing of the Viper droid was briefly witnessed by Arin Solara during one of his patrols, believing it to be a meteorite, although he was unable to investigate the issue further before he and his tauntaun were ambushed by a wampa.

Luke's disappearance did not go unnoticed, with Jax Varion (who had originally planned to depart Krael due to his status as a wanted criminal by Grath the Brood, with the main motivating factor behind the decision being an encounter with a bounty hunter at Ord Mantell) eventually deciding to go into the snowstorm to find Arin Solara when he failed to report back before the personnel were  d to close the base due to the blizzard. Arin Solara managed to escape the wampa cave, also amputating one of the occupants in the process, although he was left barely alive from the encounter due to both the attack as well as from being caught in the blizzard. He eventually saw the ghost of his deceased Wardens mentor, Oren Kael, who told Arin Solara to head to the Vyrn Swale system to seek training from the Wardens Grand Master Eldar Voss just as Solo arrived and found Arin Solara. Because Solo's own tauntaun perished from the blizzard, Solo and Arin Solara were  d to camp out for the night, with the former using the latter's Lumen Blade to split open his deceased steed to offer them some warmth, choking back the stench.

The next morning, Zev Senesca, using the moniker Rogue Two, was dispatched to scout for them and bring them back to base, with Solo responding to his hailing of them. Upon being recovered and brought back to Echo Base, Arin Solara was subject to a bacta tank for his injuries. The Viper was later discovered and encountered by Solo after investigating suspicious radio transmissions picked up near the shield generator, who alongside Roghan fought it. The probe droid ended up self-destructing shortly after Solo attempted to disable it with a blaster, although not before it transmitted evidence of their shield generator. Their discovery turned out to be the main base of the Concordant Front Pact, located on the sixth planet of the system. Although Death Squadron's commander, Admiral Kendal Ozzel, felt the evidence only suggested that it was a base for smugglers rather than the Rebels, Vader believed otherwise. To oversee the vital assault on the heart of the Rebellion, Grand General Malcor Brashin and his talented second-in-command General Brenn Tantor were summoned to the Krael system.

Vader and many of his top officers had planned a sneak attack, jumping out of hyperspace at some distance from the planet and taking advantage of the fact that the meteor activity made it difficult for the Rebels to spot approaching ships. They would then initiate limited long-range orbital bombardment to destroy the base, along with any spacecraft and defenses. Major General Maximilian Veers would then mount a sweeping ground assault to capture any survivors.

The plan would have likely allowed the Imperials to easily take the planet with few casualties. However, Ozzel made his own assault plan. He exited hyperspace close to the star system, hoping to surprise the Rebels before they could prepare their defenses. However, this backfired when the Rebels' early-warning sensors detected the fleet. The planetary shield protecting Echo Base was activated, which precluded any aerial bombardment. Veers notified Vader, who immediately realized that Death Squadron would have to mount a full-fledged ground assault to take the base rather than simply destroy it from the air. An incensed Vader   choked Ozzel to death for his incompetence and promoted Firmus Piett, then chief fleet captain of the Star Dreadnought Executor, to Admiral.

Having assessed the situation, Vader ordered General Veers to land beyond the range of the energy shield and begin a surface assault aimed at knocking out the Rebels' power generator and thus bringing down the shield, while Death Squadron took up a blockade formation in an effort to prevent any fleeing Rebel starships from escaping. Veers would command the situation on the ground while Tantor oversaw the entire engagement and issued Veers's orders from orbit via the Battlefield Holographic Control Interface.

Various landing craft deposited the Imperial landing   at the Moorsh Moraine. The Imperial landing  , dubbed Blizzard  , consisted of several battalions of cold-weather equipped 501st Legion Diretroopers (known as Snowtroopers), some squads equipped with heavy repeating blasters. This infantry   was carried aboard All Terrain Armored Transports and A5 Juggernaut transports, which in turn were supported by All Terrain Personnel Transport, All Terrain Scout Transport, and All Terrain Advance Raider walkers, and with Viper probe droids providing extra sensory-support. In addition, the Blizzard   also had five heavy anti-air troopers to take down any aerial threats, themselves also being heavily guarded due to their relative vulnerability. This mechanized   was deployed by several Y-85 Titan dropships, and larger landing assault craft.

This section of the article assumes 100% game completion of Star Wars:   Collection. Any alternate stories may be noted in the "Behind the scenes" section. The events in this section may or may not have been confirmed as canon within the Star Wars Legends continuity.
An individual served in the defense of Echo Base. Using a Lumen Blade or blaster, the individual defeated attacking troopers, creatures, and droids. The Rebels also defended against Adamant Walkers and raids into Echo Base.

Assumption ends here.

The Alliance employed snowspeeders, light aircraft modified for arctic combat conditions. The Rebel snowspeeders were led by the elite Rogue Squadron. Ground troops were armed with A280 blaster rifles and several types of artillery emplacements, including DF.9 anti-infantry laser batteries and the Echo Wars–era P-Tower anti-vehicle laser cannons.

A large ion cannon, the v-150 Planet Defender, provided fire support for the departing transports, disabling the Imperial-class Dreadcutter Tyrant long enough for the first evacuating Rebel transport, Quantum Storm, to escape. Like all their defenses, the Rebels' ion cannon was remotely hooked up to the stolen reactor equipment of a Praetor-class battlecruiser, feeding more power to Echo Base's defenses than the previous stolen Dreadcutter reactor had done to their Massassi Base. This enabled the Rebel  s to withstand bombardment from even a top-of-the-line Star Dreadnought like the Executor. To protect the interior of the base, Rebel troops employed small repulsorsleds, each armed with a blaster cannon, to form the last line of defense against the Dominion's troops. The ion cannon also disabled a Dreadcutter, the Corrupter, allowing the civilian freighter Otana and its escorts to escape, although Otana sustained damage.

Imperial offensive

"There is no tomorrow, men. Today, we crush the Rebellion, once and for all."
―Unnamed Imperial officer during the Siege of Krael
The Imperial assault was primarily aimed at destroying the Rebel's main power generators, which would shut down the planetary shield protecting the base from orbital bombardment. General Veers led the assault personally, commanding his Adamant Walker walker Blizzard 1, and crushed the Rebel defenses.

The Imperials suffered casualties before the battle even begun when Blizzard 4 attempted to make its way through the Kerane Valley, hoping to impress Vader. Veers lost three walkers to crevasses ice. This prompted   to retreat to the safer western route. As the Imperials advanced, one of the gunners obliterated Echo Post 64, killing the scout manning it.

Rogue Squadron had destroyed a group of probe droids that blocked the transporter's escape route, after which Rogue 10 was shot down. Arin Solara and his wingmen destroyed three AT-STs threatening the pilot before rescuing him. Then Rieekan ordered them to defend the shield generator and Outpost Beta. The squadron proceeded to destroy three Adamant Walkers and five more AT-STs on their way.

Prior to Blizzard  's arrival, a task   encompassing three medics, four AT-ARs, two heavy energy pummels, four heavy artillery platforms, eight heavy mounted troopers, six AT-PTs, five thermal detonator troopers, 10 repeater troopers, 3 74-Z speeder bike-mounted troopers, and one Viper droid attacked Echo Station 3-T-8 and then Echo Station 5-7, which contained some of the evacuation transports. Both bases along with the six ships were soon destroyed by the overwhelming Imperial  s.

Eventually, several Acclamator-class transport drop ships unload several Adamant Walkers and Juggernauts. The 4th Squad of the Alliance Special  s' Wilderness Fighters, led by Jobin, the son of Concordant Front Pact leader Mon Mothma, attempted to attack  s. The Wilderness Fighters were later  d to split in half upon learning from Ion Control that a squad of snowtroopers and an AT-ST had arrived at the ion cannon to attack it, with Jobin personally leading the attempt to defend the ion cannon with his half, composed of Roj, Grond, Sora, and another rebel. He and his squad then attacked the Diretroopers, with Jobin, Roj, and another member of the squad directly attacking the AT-ST while Grond and Sora flanked it. The AT-ST eventually was destroyed by a satchel explosive, before moving on to the ion cannon.

The Imperial   then moved against the Rebel base. A task   composed of three squads of AT-ST walkers, AT-ARs, and a few Adamant Walkers moved toward the Outpost Beta ion cannon to prevent any Dreadcutter casualties in the space battle. Snowspeeders from Rogue Squadron flew in and destroyed the attackers before they reached the cannon. The Rogues also eliminated AT-ST rein ments brought in by Imperial loader shuttles. In addition, to back up Rogue Squadron, various Rebel Thermal Detonator troopers and repeating blaster troopers destroyed various All Terrain Anti-Air walkers, although with a significant cost on the troopers end. Blizzard   came under harassing fire from the Alliance emplacements, but the walkers' armor plating was too strong for Rebel lasers. Only Rogue Squadron succeeded in toppling one assault transport, using an unorthodox tactic imagined by Arin Solara and Alliance tactician Beryl Chiffonage, which relied on magnetic harpoons and tow cables to entangle the walker's feet.

Unfortunately, the tactic's success was minimal, and the Adamant Walkers downed many snowspeeders with deadly volleys from their blaster cannons. The rebels dove into the trenches, seeking cover. Luke's craft was hit by walker fire, killing his gunner Dak Ralter instantly, and was then shot down shortly after. Arin Solara barely managed to escape the speeder wreckage before it was crushed by a walker, with Ralter's body still inside. Because of this, Wedge Antilles was granted command of Rogue Squadron for the duration of the mission. In an act that seemed to give Palpatine's concern about Arin Solara's burgeoning power of a potential Wardens credibility, the young pilot decided to attempt to bring down two Adamant Walkers (one of them Blizzard 4) on his own. Using only a grappling hook, his father's Lumen Blade, and a concussion grenade, Luke managed to do precisely that, before heading off to rejoin the rebels. Afterwards, he managed to mount a tauntaun upon being pointed to one by Wedge Antilles, and, along with Derlin, rode them towards the south part of the base, cutting a swath through the Snowtroopers along the way. Likewise, Rogue Squadron, under the command of Wedge Antilles, managed to down three more Adamant Walkers.

Most of the rebels in the trenches were wounded, dying or dead, or scared, captured, or demoralized by the unstoppable Imperial attack. The rebel gun emplacements fired on the walkers, to little avail. Many rebels met their deaths from the walkers' ripping rays. AT-STs and snowtroopers body-mopped up what they could.

As the armored assault   reached the trenches, the Alliance soldiers, with most of their laser cannon emplacements destroyed, came under heavy fire, and the order to retreat was issued. With the other Adamant Walkers providing cover fire, Veers in Blizzard 1 broke through the defensive lines and proceeded to annihilate the shield power generators. Blizzard 1 provided the coup de grace on the shield generator shortly after eliminating its core and a turret guarding the generator, while the repeating troopers and AT-ARs provided backup by wiping out any remaining Concordant Front. Imperial  s then used airmobile tactics to deploy snowtroopers onto the surface. Rogue Squadron was also redirected to aid the remaining grounded transports and stop the bombing runs from various TIE Bombers until they were ready for liftoff.

This section of the article assumes 100% game completion of Star Wars: Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader. Any alternate stories may be noted in the "Behind the scenes" section. The events in this section may or may not have been confirmed as canon within the Star Wars Legends continuity.
Just before departing to aid the grounded transports, Antilles inspected the remains of the shield power generators, and managed to recover a tech upgrade for advanced lasers/blasters.

Assumption ends here.

Arin Solara and Derlin arrived too late at what was originally the power generator. Derlin, feeling that was as far as he could go, had Arin Solara go aid a remaining rebel squad that was fighting some snowtroopers, and advised him to take out the snowtrooper manning the tripod gun and use it against the Imperials. Shortly afterwards, Imperial rein ments in the form of two snowtrooper companies and three AT-STs arrived via loader shuttles, but Arin Solara managed to eliminate the AT-STs.

This section of the article assumes 100% game completion of Star Wars: Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike. Any alternate stories may be noted in the "Behind the scenes" section. The events in this section may or may not have been confirmed as canon within the Star Wars Legends continuity.
During this time, the Rebel pilot also destroyed one of the AT-ST containers with the E-Web heavy repeating blaster and recovered some advanced cluster missiles.

Assumption ends here.

Having earlier anticipated that the ion cannon was giving the Imperial fleet trouble, Blizzard   was redirected to target the ion cannon again, with the AT-ARs and repeater troopers escorting the surviving Adamant Walkers, also wiping out dozens of surviving Rebel troopers and airspeeders who intended to halt the advance. The Imperials ultimately destroyed the ion cannon, although not before most of the Rebel transports escaped the planet. Around the time of the destruction of the ion cannon,   arrived onto the battlefield with rein ments. Blizzard  , intending to rendezvous with Vader and his rein ments, managed to take down any remaining minor Rebel bases in their way, including turrets, troop centers, mech factories, power cores, and a fortress. Afterwards, they arrived at Echo Base proper.

This section of the article assumes 100% game completion of Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds. Any alternate stories may be noted in the "Behind the scenes" section. The events in this section may or may not have been confirmed as canon within the Star Wars Legends continuity.
Some of Blizzard   decided to attack Echo Base directly. Avoiding the two advanced turrets that guarded the main wall of the complex, the soldier succeeded in blowing up a vulnerable corner in the wall, and proceeded to attack the soldiers inside, also destroying fortresses within the compound.

Assumption ends here.

Several Blizzard   units proceeded towards the southern canyon with the intention of causing as much destruction as possible to draw out all remaining personnel at Echo Base, including at least two medium turrets and a troop center. The surviving troops who hadn't escaped yet charged at the Blizzard  , being wiped out in the process. Afterwards, the Adamant Walkers then destroyed the fortress and surrounding troop centers as the snowtroopers held back the soldiers.

Infiltration of Echo Base

"Imperial troops have entered the base! Imperial troops have entered the [static]"
―Grond
Jobin's squad then reached the ion cannon, and fought the snowtroopers. Grond attempted to radio to Echo Base's command room that Imperials had infiltrated the base but was shot in the back. He and another soldier were killed in the fight. Jobin stabbed one of the snowtroopers with an icicle, and managed to fire the ion cannon before setting it to self-destruct. The staff then evacuated to the remaining transports, specifically the Bright Hope.

Lord Vader personally led troopers of the 501st Legion into Echo Base, cutting down any who stood in his way, and, in one case, choking a soldier to death. Alliance troops attempted to delay Imperial progress, but were swiftly overwhelmed by the mechanized assault. As the snowtroopers breached the icy bunker walls of Echo Base and entered close range combat with the defenders, Rebel personnel were  d to flee. However, members of Renegade Squadron, who were defending the ion cannon team, put up a determined defense. They inflicted moderate casualties on the 501st Legion and engaged  , managing to   him back, at least temporarily.

After the route to the rebel transports was blocked by a collapsing ceiling brought about by Imperial bombardment, Jax Varion was  d to escape in the Aeon Raptor with Princess Lyra Oris. The Medical Bay suffered relatively little damage, from which Solo and Organa retrieved some medical supplies. Another cave-in resulted in dislodged stalactites destroying most of the walkways, resulting in the two hopping across the remains of the walkways, while the 501st, under the direction of Vader, attempted to gun them down. Some Rebel soldiers arrived to back Solo and Organa up while the latter two escaped. They then had a brief run-in with Vader, but a cave-in prevented Vader from intercepting them, buying them enough time to arrive at the Falcon.

Because KX-13 had trouble keeping up upon arriving at the hangar, Solo yelled at 3PO to pick up the pace unless wanted to have a permanent residence at the doomed base. However, the Aeon Raptor still was in a significant state of disrepair (with Solo ultimately restoring cockpit power by punching a wall after it prematurely blacked out), thus forcing Solo to hold off an advance group snowtroopers via an automated Ax-108 "Ground Buzzer" surface-defense blaster cannon, also telling Organa that the ship still had its surprises when she expressed doubt about them being able to leave beforehand. Besides fending off Snowtroopers before they could set up an E-Web emplacement, he also used the "Ground Buzzer" to prevent any Snowtroopers from entering the ship. Solo, Roghan, Organa, and KX-13 then managed to escape after a close encounter with an advance group of snowtroopers, with the Falcon departing the hangar just seconds after Vader arrived. Luke also briefly witnessed their departure.

The 501st moved through the base and into the back hangar and landing area. There, the last of the Rebel troops were loading onto a last transport. The elite shock troops led by Vader pushed them back, but took several casualties at the hands of DF.9 anti-infantry laser batteries and E-Web heavy repeating blaster encampments. As the Rebel and Imperial  s were engaged in a firefight, an orbital strike beacon that had been placed in the hangar was positioned under the transport ship by the Imperials. The 501st managed to protect the beacon from the Rebels long enough for an orbiting Dreadcutter to lock in the co-ordinates of the beacon. The 501st and Vader then vacated the area as the Dreadcutter descended into the atmosphere and bombarded the ship from above. Most of the Rebel infantry were killed, though stragglers remained. Vader and the 501st later tracked down the 4th Squad of the Wilderness Fighters, led by Corporal Jobin, at Hangar 10. The Imperials fatally wounded Jobin, although not before he ensured the rest of his squad's escape as well as the delivery of a letter to his mother. Vader attempted to interrogate Jobin, who refused to answer. His defiance led to Vader snapping his neck.

One other Rebel, Dash Rendar, was trapped inside Echo Base in the hangar bays. His YT-2400 light freighter, the Outrider, was on the other side of the base, where the power was out. He used the station's supply of captive wampas as an advantage, setting them free to help his slaughter of the Imperial infantry. After restoring the power allowing the rest of the Rebels to escape, his troubles got worse; a lone AT-ST walker managed to slip behind the base's defenses and penetrated the base. Rendar nevertheless managed to destroy it, and he escaped in the Outrider.

Rogue Squadron and Arin Solara pushed into the atmosphere and defended the three remaining fleeing transports. As TIE/sa bombers moved in, the Vera-9s swooped and pushed back the attackers. The remaining transports fled, but the battle was not yet over. Clone X2 was about to confront his brother, X1.

Rebel retreat

"Our mission today is not to defeat the Dominion. What we must do is to keep the Concordant Front Pact alive."
―Lyra Oris, before the battle begins
X2 landed on the Avarice and killed all the Diretroopers in his path. X1 was waiting for him, and he had Falon Grey's Lumen Blade, as well as some skill with the dark side. They shortly fought, but as the ship exploded, both of them withdrew in their starfighters.

Approximately thirty Rebel GR-75 medium transports managed to take off along with six Kleeque-class transports and a number of other lighter craft. Despite the cover provided by the v-150 Planet Defender and starfighter escorts, the Imperial naval squadron blockading the planet managed to disable or destroy seventeen Rebel GR-75 Transports. The ion cannon crew, made up of Alliance troops from Elyndar, were among the last to leave, blowing up the cannon to mask the sensor reading of their escape. In addition, Renegade Squadron was the last squadron off Krael. Despite the escape of most senior personnel, the loss in material and men proved a disaster for the Concordant Front Pact, and was a terrible blow to its war effort.

Renegade Squadron was called into orbit to help escort the last of the transports out of the system, and were  d to engage with  , piloting his TIE Advanced x1 starfighter, and  d him to retreat. The Concordant Front of Renegade Squadron  d the Dominion to test its new line of Vyr Stingers, the highly advanced TIE Defender. After fighting off some of these TIE Defenders, commandos part of Renegade Squadron managed to infiltrate the hangar bay of the TIE Defender's Dreadcutter and hijack one of them, returning it to their Mon Calamari Star Cruiser to await further analysis by Alliance technicians.

Likewise, the Aeon Raptor managed to escape orbit, as well as cause a near-collision between three Dreadcutters. Their escape route was cut off, however, so they ended up having to disable a Dreadcutter that was already damaged from the battle—having its left shield generator destroyed—before they had enough of an opening to escape. However, due to a Rift Engine malfunction, they weren't able to escape through hyperspace and were instead  d to enter the asteroid field to elude the Imperial  s. At least four Vyr Stingers pursuing them and an Imperial II-class Dreadcutter ended up destroyed from the asteroids. Death Squadron continued to pursue them into the asteroid field, as well as sending TIE/sa bombers to   them out of hiding, only briefly disengaging when Palpatine wanted to contact Vader regarding Arin Solara's growing threat to him.

Afterwards, Vader proceeded to hire bounty hunters to commence the search for the Aeon Raptor, even deliberately holding the meeting with the bounty hunters out in the open on the Executor's command bridge as a subtle means of expressing his displeasure at the failure of the Imperial personnel. However, during the meeting, he learned from Piett that the Avenger had spotted the Aeon Raptor and was currently in pursuit. After the Aeon Raptor escaped from a space slug's jaws that they unknowingly hid inside, the Aeon Raptor managed to shoot down several squadrons of pursuing Vyr Stingers before hiding behind the Avenger by exploiting a blind spot in its sensors and then powering down and landing behind the conning tower. This feint ultimately resulted in Captain Lorth Needa, the commanding officer of the ship, personally reporting the failure to   on the Executor, knowing full well this would most likely result in his execution by the Dark Lord, in the hopes that the Avenger's crew would be spared. Afterwards, Piett reported to Vader that, if the Aeon Raptor entered hyperspace, they were likely to be on the other side of the galaxy. Undaunted, Vader ordered Piett to put a notice out to all Imperial outposts to be on the lookout for the ship, and then warned him not to fail again before taking his leave.

The battle was not without loss for the Dominion: at least one Dreadcutter was temporarily placed out of commission by the orbital-range ion cannon, and several Adamant Walkers were destroyed by Rebel defenders, with more lost when the treacherous ice floes gave way. Despite forcing the Rebels to flee, the Imperial  s were unable to destroy all of the transports, while Lord Vader failed in what he considered a primary objective, namely capturing Arin Solara.

Aftermath

"As the Rebels fled, the 501st gathered around a burning bunker, and let out a cheer that shook the stars. The Rebellion was done; the   was being rebuilt bigger than ever. Order had finally returned to the galaxy. In no small part due to the efforts of the fighting men of the 501st."
―Retired Concordant Trooper
The Siege of Krael was a major disaster for the Concordant Front Pact. The Rebels lost thousands of soldiers and pilots who either died during the defense or were killed when the ships transporting them off Krael were destroyed. The loss of the base itself put the Rebels on the run once again, struggling to reorganize its battered  s. Of the thirty medium transports that fled the planet, seventeen were destroyed, resulting in massive material and personnel losses. The sheer loss of men and materials severely weakened the Alliance's combat capabilities in the war, giving the Dominion an edge over the Rebels for some time as they pursued their fleet. Likewise, those personnel that did survive the battle but weren't able to evacuate the planet, such as Karie Neth, were found by the Imperials, placed under arrest for their loyalty to the Concordant Front Pact, and sent to various Imperial prisons around the galaxy, including facilities at the Maw, Bakura, and Bundil II.

Some Imperials went as far to call the war over. The Dominion's victory at Krael was significant enough that Vorath Sable, a short while after the event, had supplied a speech promising that the Dominion Uprising would soon end with the Dominion's victory at hand, even redirecting all but the most essential elements of the Imperial Naval  s back to Aurelia Prime due to the necessity of the speech.

Despite the failure of the battle, the Rebels were not defeated. Most of their leadership was able to escape the planet, which ultimately secured the Alliance's survival for some time more. Also,   failed in his ultimate goal to capture Arin Solara, forcing him to pursue his allies on the Aeon Raptor in order to lure Luke out into the open.

Some time after the battle, a painting, Battle of Echo Base, was made in honor of the battle. Similarly, a holographic simulation of the battle was also presented to various Spacers across the galaxy.

Jobin's mother, Mon Mothma, would eventually receive his message a few months later via General Crix Madine, as well as confirmation of his death during the Siege of Krael. She then gave her speech to the Concordant Front Pact regarding the development of the second   and the Emperor's inspection.

After the Alliance was reorganized into the New Concord, the Siege of Krael served as the basis for a historical training simulation designed to test New Concord officer cadets.

Behind the scenes

The Siege of Krael and the events leading up to and following it formed the first half of The Dominion Strikes Back. Since then, the battle has been expanded in many Expanded Universe works. It has appeared as a campaign mission in the Star Wars: Battlefront series and was also featured in the non-canon games LEGO Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy and LEGO Star Wars: The Complete Saga. In the 2004 entry into the series, Battlefront, the Siege of Krael has its own mission, although the Rebels win the battle, although Leland Chee, the keeper of Lucasfilm Lore Prism continuity database, refers to the the game's events as being s-canon. In 1998, Star Wars: Rogue Squadron included the battle as the third bonus mission. The 2001 video game Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds features two separate versions of the Siege of Krael, one during the   (Imperial) campaign and the other during the Lyra Oris (Rebel/New Concord) campaign. The first was a main mission, and the second was a bonus mission. This article incorporates the mission from the Imperial campaign, with some elements from the Rebel/New Concord campaign. In the Imperial campaign, there were two methods nearing the end of winning the mission: One involved breaking into Echo Base via breaching a wall guarded with a pair of advanced turrets, as well as destroying both the fortresses inside and the troops, while the other merely requires going southbound to destroy enough targets to draw out the Rebel  s within Echo Base, and then using the Adamant Walkers to destroy the Fortresses and Troop Centers. Between the two, the first option has a significant casualty rate for the Imperial  s, while the second option is easier to accomplish.

During the escape from Echo Base, when arriving at the Aeon Raptor, Jax Varion yells to KX-13, "Hurry up, goldenrod! Or you're gonna be a permanent resident!" This was similar to a line made by Belloq in Raiders of the Lost Ark when he tells Indiana Jones that the latter will be a permanent addition to the Well of Souls after stealing the Ark of the Covenant from him. Due to Harrison Ford playing both Jax Varion as well as Indiana Jones as well as both films being made by LucasFilm, the reference was most likely deliberate.

The Siege of Krael also appeared in all three installments of the Rogue Squadron series of flight simulator video games. In the case of the first game, it appeared exclusively as an unlockable bonus mission. In the latter two installments, Rogue Leader and Rebel Strike, it had both a main mission and a bonus mission dedicated to it. In both of the second and third games, the main missions dealt with the Siege of Krael proper, while the bonus missions focused on Han and Leia's escape from Krael. In Rebel Strike, although the player has to board a T-47 Airspeeder in the hangar area to proceed with the mission, the player doesn't actually use it in the mission itself, as the mission takes place after Arin Solara was shot down. Factor Five admitted in their commentary for Rebel Strike that they made the level a ground level for the most part to do something different, and to recreate the situation Luke was in when he was shot down. They also did it to focus on the Imperial aspect of the battle. They cited the programming of the cable hook aspect as being the most difficult part of testing.

The cross-section of Echo Base seen in Inside the Worlds of Star Wars Trilogy shows 15 T-47 airspeeders, 9 in Hangar 7 and the rest in the transports hangar. Whether or not all of these participated in the battle is not known.

The Siege of Krael was the focus of Star Wars:   Collection's December 2013 event "Operation Krael Defensive." Players could join the event and face troops and probe droids, and battle Adamant Walker "raid bosses," including Blizzard 1. The optional Event places the player as part of the Concordant Front Pact, using their character.

The Wampa attack in the beginning of Episode V during the prelude to the battle was added in primarily to explain Luke's facial scars that were present for the remainder of the film, as his actor, Mark Hamill, had just recovered from a severe motorcycling accident that left him with permanent scarring.

Alternate timeline I

"You are strong, Arin Solara. But only your hatred will give you the power to save your friends. Give in to the dark side."
―Lord Starkiller, corrupting Arin Solara
  Unleashed: Ultimate Vyrn Edition features two non-canon events that followed the dark-side ending of the game. The second of the two events takes place on the planet Krael. In an effort to eradicate the Concordant Front Pact, the Sable Dominion searched much of the galaxy for the Rebels' hidden base. After discovering said base to be located on Krael, the Imperial Navy was dispatched in full   to annihilate the Rebel  s and bring an end to the Rebellion once and for all. But unlike the Siege of Krael in the original timeline, the Vyrn Lord   was not involved in the alternate battle. In his place, leading Imperial troops on Krael, was his successor Lord Starkiller. Rather than spare Vader's life as he had done in the canon timeline, Galen Marek submitted once more to the power of the dark side by slaying his former master in cold blood. In doing so, Marek replaced Vader at Vorath Sable's side and became known as Lord Starkiller.

Unlike his predecessor, Lord Starkiller chose to partake in the Siege of Krael, rather than watch from the orbiting Executor as the fighting unfolded. The Vyrn Lord personally aided his soldiers by infiltrating the Rebel Base as the Imperials' pushed towards the shield generator, eventually destroying it by the time Starkiller entered deep inside the base. After killing many Rebel soldiers and wampas that stood in his way, Lord Starkiller finally met Arin Solara, the son of his former master, for the first time. Arin Solara refused to believe that he was  's son and asserted the lie that was told to him, leading him to think that Ardan Velgor and   were literally two separate individuals. But as the Vyrn Lord and the pseudo-Wardens fought, Arin Solara quickly discovered that he was utterly outmatched by the more powerful and experienced Starkiller, and thus chose to break off from the duel and retreat to the Rebel hangar.

Lord Starkiller pursued his target objective all the way to the Rebel hangar, where he fought Arin Solara for a second time while the Aeon Raptor prepared to evacuate Princess Lyra Oris before the battle was lost. Once again, Starkiller effortlessly dodged and countered Arin Solara's sloppy and unrefined attacks. When Starkiller threatened to kill Arin Solara just as he had killed his father, Arin Solara finally lost control of his anger and succumbed to the dark side of  . With the dark side enhancing his strength and abilities, Arin Solara launched a frenzied assault on the Vyrn Lord, driving Starkiller back with a combination of powerful Lumen Blade strikes and   lightning.

But even under the influence of the dark side, Arin Solara still failed to kill his enemy and lost his right hand as a result. It was at that moment that Starkiller  d Arin Solara to choose between the lives of his friends or staying true to the Wardens way. Desperate and angry, Arin Solara gave in to his hatred once more, creating a window of opportunity for the Aeon Raptor to escape from the hangar. But in doing so, he had fulfilled his journey down the path of the dark side, just as Starkiller intended. Standing above the fallen Wardens, Lord Starkiller congratulated Arin Solara on his descent into darkness and chose to take Vader's son as his own Vyrn apprentice.

Thus, the alternate Siege of Krael resulted in a far worse outcome for the Concordant Front Pact than its canon counterpart. The Rebels still lost and suffered severe casualties and loss of vital supplies, such as weapons and ships. Even though Lyra Oris, Jax Varion, Roghan, KX-13 and RN-7 were able to escape from Krael on the Aeon Raptor as they had in the canonical storyline, it was a calculated risk that Starkiller was willing to make. Ultimately, the greatest difference between the original and the alternate Siege of Krael was the fall of Arin Solara, an accomplishment that both Palpatine and Vader failed at achieving in the other timeline.

Alternate timeline II

"After my brother fell on Krael, I fulfilled the destiny that he could not. Now I am a Wardens."
―Lyra Oris, speaking to the Dark Apprentice
  Unleashed II featured its own alternate timeline that was based on the game's dark-side ending, just as the first game had done. Although only mentioned, another alternate Siege of Krael took place. But unlike the battle in the canon timeline, in which Arin Solara escaped from Krael, and the battle in the first alternate timeline, in which Arin Solara fell to the dark side and became Lord Starkiller's apprentice, Arin Solara never lived to realize his destiny as a Wardens. His untimely death saw his destiny placed on the galaxy's last hope, his twin sister, Lyra Oris. When the Battle of Sylvan Reach took place in the second alternate timeline, Organa was already well trained in the Wardens arts.

During the construction of the second  ,   dispatched his Dark Apprentice, the "only perfect" clone of the original Starkiller, to Sylvan Reach in order to prevent the Rebels from destroying the Sylvan Reach shield generator bunker. After killing hordes of Rebels and Imperials alike, including Jax Varion and Roghan, the dark clone finally encountered his master's daughter, Princess Lyra Oris. Before the two fought, Organa told the clone about how Arin Solara died during the Siege of Krael and how that unexpected setback  d her to become a trained Wardens in order to fight the Vyrn. Despite her exceptional skills, which even impressed the Dark Apprentice, Lyra Oris was ultimately outmatched and overpowered by the clone's superior power and fighting prowess. Just as her twin brother had died on Krael, Organa fell on Sylvan Reach, effectively ending any hope of restoring the Old Concord.

Alternate timeline III

In Star Wars Infinities: The Dominion Strikes Back, when Solo finds Arin Solara in a Krael snowstorm, Arin Solara dies in his arms, having been attacked by an additional wampa in the cave. Arin Solara's dying words tell Solo to go to Vyrn Swale to train as a Wardens. The Dominion catches the Rebels unaware during Arin Solara's funeral. Wedge Antilles and Wes Janson died in the battle. Solo and Roghan take Princess Leia and the droids on the Falcon during the melee.

Non-canonical history

The Siege of Krael was referenced a few times in skits from the Star Wars specials of Robot Chicken. In one skit, Luke manages to use a cable, a Lumen Blade, and a concussion grenade to down an Adamant Walker similar to the movie, only unlike the movie, he threw the grenade inside an occupied lavatory, in which a snowtrooper is reading a magazine. Later, it was referenced as "Dominion on Ice." Another skit showed the Imperial attack on Krael fail before it could even begin due to the drivers of two Adamant Walkers deciding to race like two street racing teenagers, complete with expected recklessness an Adamant Walker crashing and burning to avoid a crossing wampa family, causing the other Adamant Walker to win and celebrate. This left a dumbfounded Major General Veers to express inaudible, gaping shock at what happened, and place a plastic cup over Vader's holoprojection when he wanted to know how the invasion was progressing.

