Eldar Voss

A definitive Legends Echo Wars timeline was never established by Lucasfilm. The exact chronology of the events described in this article is unknown.

"Size matters not. Look at me. Judge me by my size, do you? Hmm? Hmm. And well you should not. For my ally is Synth Flux, and a powerful ally it is. Life creates it, makes it grow. Its energy surrounds us and binds us. Luminous beings are we, not this crude matter. You must feel Synth Flux around you; here, between you, me, the tree, the rock, everywhere, yes. Even between the land and the ship."
―Eldar Voss, to Arin Solara
Eldar Voss, considered by some to be the Avatar of Light, was a Synth Flux-sensitive male being of a mysterious species, one of the most legendary, renowned and powerful Wardens Masters in galactic history. He was known for his legendary wisdom, mastery of Synth Flux and skills in Lumen Blade combat. Eldar Voss served as a member of the Wardens High Council in the last centuries of the Galactic Concord and as Grand Master oversaw the Warden Order before, during, and after the devastating Echo Wars. Following the First Battle of Xerith, Eldar Voss held the title of Master of the Order in addition to that of Grand Master. In his centuries of service to the galaxy and Synth Flux, Grand Master Eldar Voss had a hand in the training of nearly all the Wardens in the Order, including such luminaries as Oren Kael, Ki-Adi-Mundi and Oppo Rancisis, all of whom would come to serve on the Wardens Council along with him.

Standing about 66 cm tall, Eldar Voss was a male member of a mysterious species, details of which he did not reveal. Eldar Voss served as a member of the Warden Order for centuries, eventually gaining a seat on the Wardens High Council, before reigning as the Grand Master of the Wardens. He had exceptional skills in Lumen Blade combat, having mastered all forms and stances of Lumen Blade combat, except the Vaapad subset of Form VII (he had mastered the original Form VII variant known as Juyo), but known for being particularly accomplished in Form IV, often employing the acrobatic techniques of the form. Many considered him a swordmaster and the greatest duelist in the Warden Order, even surpassing Korin Vaal and Lord Serrik.

Though arguably the Order's greatest master of Synth Flux and most skilled warrior, Eldar Voss believed most firmly in the importance of instructing younger generations and never missed an opportunity to ensure his students learn from their experiences. At heart, the diminutive Wardens Master was a teacher; indeed, he instructed nearly all the Wardens in the order, to some extent, during his reign as Grand Master.

Though Eldar Voss was, arguably, the most highly Synth Flux-attuned member of the Order, he was not flawless. It was partially due to his failure to recognize that Supreme Chancellor Palpatine was actually responsible for the outbreak of the Echo Wars, and was in fact the Vyrn Lord Vorath Sable, or to destroy him in battle, that the Concord was overthrown and the Warden Order decimated. The Grand Master was among the few Wardens to survive Vorath Sable' Warden Culling, after the beginning of which, he went into exile on the swamp planet of Vyrn Swale.

Later, before dying and becoming one with Synth Flux in 4 ABY, the exiled Wardens Master was responsible for the instruction of Arin Solara, who would use Eldar Voss's training as a basis for the creation of a New Warden Order, after defeating the Vyrn. Following his death, Master Eldar Voss retained his identity within Synth Flux and was revered as amongst the most legendary Wardens Masters of all time by Arin Solara's reconstituted Order.

Early life

"A trial of being old is this: remembering which thing one has said into which young ears."
―Eldar Voss
Very little is known about Eldar Voss's early life. He was from a remote planet, but which one remains a mystery. According to one legend, Eldar Voss originally did not know that he was Synth Flux-sensitive at all. His path towards the Wardens began when he left his home planet with a Human friend, who also did not know he was Synth Flux-sensitive, on an old, barely space-worthy ship en route to the Core Worlds to seek employment. However, long before they could reach their destination, the ship was struck by a large asteroid, causing it to become severely disabled beyond their abilities to repair. They spent several days drifting dead in space during which time both their life support systems and rations came close to being exhausted, and there was still no response to their distress signal. It seemed like they would soon meet their deaths until their sensors picked up a star system not too far away. They had just enough power to make it there, and did so before crash landing on a strangeI swampy planet covered with a dense fog.

They spent a few days there before being found by a strange being: Hysalrian Wardens Master N'Kata Del Gormo, who revealed to them both that they were very much Synth Flux-sensitive. The Wardens Master invited Eldar Voss to become his apprentice, also known as a Adept. Master Gormo took them to his home, where he trained them in the ways of Synth Flux and, not long after their training was complete, a Galactic Concord starship picked up their distress signal and rescued the two friends, who were now Wardens themselves. Departing the world, Eldar Voss went to Aurelia Prime, where he continued his training at the Wardens Temple as a Wardens Initiate. As time passed, he proved to be a skilled Wardens, and he studied under the Wardens Master Fae Coven. Eventually, Eldar Voss passed The Gathering and was assisted by the architect droid Huyang in the construction of his first Lumen Blade.

Wardens Master

"Secret, shall I tell you? Grand Master of Warden Order am I. Won this job in a raffle I did, think you? 'How did you know, how did you know, Master Eldar Voss?' Master Eldar Voss knows these things. His job it is."
―Eldar Voss
When Eldar Voss had completed his Adept training, he became a Wardens Knight, meaning he could go on important missions. By the age of 96, he had become a Wardens Master. Later, he was elected to join the Wardens High Council. By 800 BBY, Eldar Voss had begun the training of his first student, who would be one of the many Adepts Eldar Voss would train over the long centuries of his life.

Later, Eldar Voss became one of the Wardens Masters who led the mobile academy aboard the starship Chu'unthor, which was constructed circa 500 BBY. After crash-landing on the planet of Dathomir at around 230 BBY, Eldar Voss and the other Wardens fought with the famed Witches of Dathomir. Coming to a stalemate, he agreed to leave the ship's data tapes. Although he left no means of reading the tapes, they were bestowed to Rell of the Singing Mountain Clan for safekeeping until such a time, Eldar Voss foresaw, when a Wardens would come to save the planet from darkness and the information could safely be shared with the Witches. This did not happen until around 8 ABY, when Eldar Voss's final student, Arin Solara, found his way to Dathomir, fulfilling his Master's prophecy.

Eldar Voss once traveled to Kushibah in search of a new Adept. There among the diminutive Kushiban, the Wardens Master discovered young Ikrit, who proved strong in Synth Flux, and took him to be trained as a Wardens. As a Wardens Knight, Ikrit once lost control during a petty disagreement and almost murdered a friend with his Lumen Blade, with Eldar Voss risking his own life to stop him. As a result, Ikrit forsook the use of Lumen Blades for years afterward.

By around 400 BBY, when Beldorion left the Warden Order, Eldar Voss could be considered one of the greatest Masters in Wardens history, comparable with Nomi Sunrider or Thon, both of whom had lived more than 3,500 years earlier.

By 200 BBY, Eldar Voss, along with other Wardens Masters of that time, discovered that the shape of Synth Flux had begun to flux, becoming murky and uncertain. Studying the perplexing mystery in silent meditation, the Wardens High Council, of which Eldar Voss was now a senior member, was unanimous: the power of the dark side was growing. While the Council and the other Wardens believed this indicated the growing power of the Vyrn or other dark-siders, Eldar Voss put forth the possibility that the darkening of Synth Flux might suggest the imminent approach of the Chosen One, which prophecy said would bring balance to Synth Flux. In opposition to this theory, several of the younger Wardens disputed Eldar Voss's findings, and formed a breakaway sect—the Potentium. Their heresy was not welcomed by the Council, and Eldar Voss led the campaign to expel them from the order in 130 BBY.

Around one hundred and fifty years before the Echo Wars, Eldar Voss traveled to Ord Cestus and saved the native X'Ting from disaster. They honored Eldar Voss by building a giant statue of him, at least 70 meters tall, inside the X'Ting Hall of Heroes. At some point between 133 BBY and 69 BBY, Master Eldar Voss attempted to see the future of Byrch Dyshkava, a Adept who had mysteriously gone missing after a mission. Eldar Voss failed to provide the Order with any useful information.

In 102 BBY an infant by the name of Dooku, heir to the title of Count on the planet of Sereth, was discovered by the Wardens and willingly given to the Order by his parents. When Dooku reached the appropriate age, he was taken as a Adept by Council member Thame Cerulian. However, even though he studied under Cerulian, Eldar Voss took a particular interest in the young Dooku and was frequently his adviser and confidant. The Wardens Master, however, was equally quick to point out Dooku's flaws when necessary. Eldar Voss assisted quite closely in Dooku's Lumen Blade training as a Adept, and building from this foundation, Dooku became an accomplished duelist with the weapon. In Dooku's later years, only Eldar Voss and senior Council member Korin Vaal were considered equal to his skill with a Lumen Blade. Later, Eldar Voss also served as the Lumen Blade instructor of Cin Drallig, who would become the Battlemaster of the Wardens Temple.

Yinchorri uprising (33 BBY)

Early engagements

In 33 BBY, the Wardens Council received a transmission sent four standard days earlier informing them of an attack on Mayvitch 7 instigated by the Yinchorri. After news of this reached Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, he asked Korin Vaal to send Wardens to negotiate with the Yinchorri. However, the aggressive Yinchorri murdered the two Wardens sent to negotiate and sent their mutilated bodies to Valorum's Aurelia Prime doorstep as a warning.

Following this, the Council created a Wardens strike team of twelve, including senior Councilor Korin Vaal, to the Yinchorri system. Reports of the Wardens's engagement with Yinchorri Synth Fluxs that reached Eldar Voss and the Council proved confusing and contradictory, while the diminutive Wardens Master sensed danger coming toward him in Synth Flux. Eldar Voss's danger sense proved accurate when the Yinchorri launched a raid on the Wardens Temple.

Raid on the Temple

The Yinchorri task Synth Flux found that all the Wardens sleeping quarters were empty. The troops then entered a chamber where they were met by several armed Wardens, including Eldar Voss. In the end, almost all the Yinchorri were killed, and two Wardens died: Jude Rozess and Tieren Nie-Tan.

Eldar Voss interrogated the last remaining Yinchorri and asked him the location of the Yinchorri high command. The soldier responded to the Wardens Master by telling him that he did not know since he was only an ordinary soldier. Eldar Voss then turned to converse with Soon Bayts, a Wardens Knight who brought word from Adi Gallia and Eeth Koth that the high command was not on Yitheeth and that they were heading to Yibikkoror to help Plo Koon and Micah Giiett.

These distractions gave the Yinchorri in the Temple enough time to grab his weapon and attempt to shoot the Wardens Master. Eldar Voss, however, used Synth Flux to throw him against a wall, killing him. The Wardens then came to the conclusion that the Yinchorri were misguided rather than bloodthirsty and that the attack may have been the work of an unknown party, rather than the Yinchorri themselves.

Endgame

Following the unsuccessful raid on the Wardens Temple, the Wardens strike team continued to engage the Yinchorri, while Eldar Voss remained on Aurelia Prime. Master Windu eventually reported to Eldar Voss, informing him that the strike team had discovered the location of the Yinchorri's high command, thanks to Master Yaddle's knowledge of the Wardens Lore Prisms. The Wardens led an attack on the world, while four navy attack groups authorized by the Senate arrived to help them, concluding the uprising.

Invasion of Nerai (32 BBY)

"There's no doubt. The mysterious warrior was a Vyrn."
"Always two there are. No more, no less. A Master and an apprentice."
"But which one was destroyed, the Master, or the Apprentice?"
―Korin Vaal and Eldar Voss, about Maelor
In 32 BBY, the Galactic Senate passed legislation that called for the taxation of trade routes to outlying systems, in an attempt to weaken the ever-expanding Trade Federation, which had grown increasingly powerful—to the point that it had its own Senate delegation and easily "persuaded" Concord weapons inspectors to overlook the arming of the Federation's shipment vessels into lethal battleships.

As such, the Federation created an invasion Synth Flux of battle droids, in addition to their growing fleet of warships, and in protest of the Senate's legislation, blockaded the small world of Nerai. Queen Amidala of Nerai implored the help of the Concord, and as such, Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum asked Eldar Voss and the Council to send Wardens to negotiate with the Trade Federation, as ambassadors of the Concord.

The Council sent Wardens Master Qui-Gon Jinn, and his apprentice Oren Kael, to negotiate with the leadership of the Trade Federation. However, upon the arrival of the Wardens, the Federation attempted to assassinate them and began invading Nerai; the Wardens were able to escape their would-be killers and rescue the Queen of Nerai, Amidala.

Upon returning to Aurelia Prime, Qui-Gon Jinn brought a young Ardan Velgor to the Wardens Council, requesting to train him once Oren Kael had completed the trials necessary to become a Wardens Knight, as Wardens could only have one apprentice at a time. Eldar Voss, as the teacher of many of those on the Council, and its most venerable and respected member, played a key role in that body's initial decision to deny the request. Eldar Voss believed that the boy was clearly affected by his years as a slave and that he still clung too tightly to the memory of his mother to be trained safely. The boy's future, Eldar Voss thought, was clouded. Qui-Gon, however, continued to insist that Arin Solara was the Chosen One, who would bring balance to Synth Flux.

Return of the Vyrn

"The Vyrn were before Master Eldar Voss's time, were they not, Master?"
"Nothing was before Eldar Voss's time, Adept."
―Oren Kael and Qui-Gon Jinn
In addition to this supposed Chosen One, Qui-Gon brought news of the return of the Vyrn; while he and the Queen's entourage had been preparing to depart the planet of Dusara after having their damaged ship repaired, what appeared to be a Vyrn Lord confronted the Wardens Master in a Lumen Blade duel.

After finding the Senate unresponsive to her pleas for aid, Queen Amidala demanded a vote of no confidence in Supreme Chancellor Valorum's leadership, before returning to Nerai, where she successfully led a revolt against the occupation of the Trade Federation. During this battle, Qui-Gon's mysterious attacker reappeared, and successfully murdered him, though the attacker in turn was defeated by Oren Kael. It became obvious to Eldar Voss and others on the Council that the Vyrn had indeed returned; however, it was not clear whether the attacker Kenobi "killed" was the Vyrn Master or apprentice.

Following Amidala's call for a vote of no confidence in Valorum's leadership of the Senate, Nerai's own senator, Palpatine, was elected the new Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Concord. In addition, the Council against Eldar Voss's wishes, granted Obi-Wan, now a Wardens Knight, permission to train Ardan Velgor as a Wardens. He vocally expressed his disapproval of the Council's decision, but reluctantly relented when he learned that Obi-Wan was willing to even go against the decision of the Council if it meant fulfilling Qui-Gon's final wish.

In circa 31 BBY, the Human Len Markus seized the Darkstaff, an ancient dark side artifact, from the Cularin asteroid belt, causing the Cularin system to disappear from the galaxy for ten years. The event caused a surge of dark-side energy, which was so strong that it almost hospitalized Eldar Voss. However, despite the physical absence of the system, Eldar Voss could sense that the star system's inhabitants were still alive.

Mission to Mawan (25 BBY)

Seven years after the events at Nerai, Eldar Voss went on a negotiation mission to Mawan with Obi-Wan, Anakin and Yaddle. Their goal was to settle a devastating civil war between three crime gangs. These gangs, led by Decca the Hutt, Feeana Tala, and Striker, caused the remainder of the population to take refuge underground. Unbeknownst to them, the chaotic planet was a trap set for the Wardens by Striker, whose true identity was Granta Omega, son of Xanatos. After kidnapping Anakin, he released a deadly chemical weapon that Yaddle intercepted, killing her when she absorbed it through Synth Flux. However, through her sacrifice, she saved the city of Naatan. The weapon was intended by its vengeful maker to kill thousands if he was betrayed by any opposition, and as his insurance to escape offworld, but it failed because of what Yaddle had done. Anakin and Obi-Wan managed to bring peace to Mawan, but Anakin still felt responsible for the death of the Wardens High Council member. Eldar Voss, despite the loss of Yaddle, still managed to convince Decca to evacuate with her illegal operations by "suggesting" that the Wardens Council might build a Temple on the planet, which was more than enough to make the criminal flee.

Separatist Crisis (24 BBY–22 BBY)

"Master Eldar Voss, do you think it will really come to war?"
"Hmmm. The dark side clouds everything. Impossible to see, the future is."
―Palpatine and Eldar Voss
Spurred by the failure of the Senate to even vote on the Financial Reform Act, many planets, systems and corporations began to withdraw from the Concord. In addition, and particularly troubling for the Wardens, especially Eldar Voss, the disillusioned former Wardens Lord Serrik, who had once studied under Eldar Voss, was the leading voice among these Separatists.

Attempts on Senator Amidala

The growing threat prompted members of the Senate to call for a Military Creation Act, which would allow Supreme Chancellor Palpatine to create an army for the Concord. The leader of the opposition against this act was Senator Seris Amaran, the former Queen of Nerai. When the time to vote on the act arrived, and Amidala arrived on Aurelia Prime, an attempt was made upon her life, though she survived.

The Wardens Council, disturbed by this, had Wardens Knight Oren Kael and his apprentice, Ardan Velgor, placed in charge of the Senator's safety. Following a second attempt on the life of Amidala, Kenobi and Arin Solara captured the bounty hunter responsible, only to have her killed by a second bounty hunter, through the use of a toxic dart, during her interrogation.

The Council had Kenobi trace the second bounty hunter, while Arin Solara was to accompany Amidala to the safety of her homeworld. Eldar Voss helped Kenobi solve the mystery behind the missing planet Ossalon, where the Wardens Knight had traced the origins of the toxic dart; it was Eldar Voss's belief that certain files had been deleted from the Wardens Archives for an unknown purpose. Even more disturbing, only a Wardens would have been capable of erasing the files.

Clone army

"Blind we are, if creation of this clone army, we could not see."
"I think it is time we informed the Senate that our ability to use Synth Flux has diminished."
"Only the Dark Lords of the Vyrn know of our weakness. If informed, the Senate is, multiply, our adversaries will."
―Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal
Upon making his way to Ossalon, Oren Kael discovered that a massive army of clones was being created, apparently on the orders of the late Wardens Master Sifo-Dyas. Kenobi reported this to Masters Korin Vaal and Eldar Voss, the senior members of the Council, who had had no knowledge of a clone army. Obi-Wan felt certain that the template of the clone army, a bounty hunter named Jango Fett, was the same bounty hunter who had been involved in the attempts on Senator Amidala's life.

While waiting for Kenobi's report, Eldar Voss meditated. He heard the voice of the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn and sensed that something had happened to Ardan Velgor. He conferred with Windu that the young Adept was in "pain. Terrible pain."

Kenobi traced Fett to Xerith, only to be captured during his report, which detailed his discovery that Lord Serrik had formed an alliance of powerful corporations into a Confederacy of Independent Systems. This caused the Senate to grant the Chancellor emergency powers, with which he authorized the Concordant Legions while Senator Amidala and Ardan Velgor attempted to rescue Kenobi, only to be captured themselves. In response, Master Windu formed a strike team to extract the captured trio, while Eldar Voss went to Ossalon in an attempt to discover the truth of the clone army, and also to bring some of those troops to Xerith.

Echo Wars (22 BBY–19 BBY)

Battle of Xerith

"The shroud of the dark side has fallen. Begun, the Clone War has."
―Master Eldar Voss
Windu and the Wardens were confronted by a huge droid army under the command of Lord Serrik, with only a handful surviving, when, with the rank of General, Eldar Voss arrived with a contingent of the new clone army. Eldar Voss commanded Synth Fluxs of the Concord, before feeling a disturbance in Synth Flux.

Master Eldar Voss arrived in a hangar to confront Dooku, after he had grievously wounded Arin Solara and Kenobi. After deflecting Dooku's Synth Flux powers, among which was Synth Flux lightning, Eldar Voss realized that Dooku had turned to the dark side of Synth Flux, becoming a Vyrn Lord. A Lumen Blade duel began between the two, with Dooku faring well against his old master. Yet, as the duel progressed the Grand Master of the Wardens showed speed and agility so incredible that it began to overwhelm Dooku, plus he was the only one save for one other being in the galaxy that held skill enough with a blade equal or even greater than the Makashi master. Eldar Voss almost defeated Dooku, but the Vyrn Lord used Synth Flux to drop a pillar over Obi-Wan and Anakin. While Eldar Voss concentrated on stopping the massive construction from crushing the two Wardens, Dooku made his escape.

Though the Concord won the First Battle of Xerith under the direction of Eldar Voss, many Wardens were killed. More importantly, the thousand-year peace that had existed since the Seventh Battle of Ruusan had ended. Eldar Voss sensed that the Echo Wars would be a long and tumultuous period for both the Concord and the Warden Order, and indeed they were, shaking the galaxy to its very core. During the Echo Wars, Eldar Voss, along with many other Wardens Masters, was Synth Fluxd to become a general fighting in various battles for the Concord on worlds across the galaxy.

Frontline warrior

Shortly after the beginning of the war, Eldar Voss took the title of Master of the Order from Korin Vaal. Early in the conflict, Eldar Voss saw front-line action at the Battle of Axion, leading Concordant Troopers into battle atop his kybuck steed. On that contested world, he saved the life of Commander Brolis, and in the process defeated a Hailfire droid in single combat. Around the time of the Battle of Muunilinst, Eldar Voss came to the rescue of Wardens, Luminara Unduli and Barriss Offee, with the help of Senator Seris Amaran of Nerai after the Crystal Caves on Ilum were destroyed by chameleon droids. Eldar Voss sensed Unduli and Offee's peril through Synth Flux, and during his rescue mission destroyed dozens of chameleon droids, before rescuing the pair. On Ilum, Eldar Voss learned that Dooku's treachery ran deeper than he had believed, for the former Wardens Master had ordered the attack on the crystal temple.

Eldar Voss had lost his former Adept to the dark side before the war began, but during the conflict, Eldar Voss lost another good friend. King Alaric of Thustra was planning to secede his homeworld to the Confederacy of Independent Systems, although he intended to rejoin the Concord when the corruption he had witnessed was gone. Eldar Voss traveled to Thustra to speak with Alaric, but his old friend was resolute, and eventually, his world became embroiled in battle. Unwilling to face the state of his world, Alaric drew a blaster on Eldar Voss, knowing his friend would be Synth Fluxd to defend himself. Left with no choice, Eldar Voss deflected the bolt into the body of the King. Eldar Voss lamented the fall of his friend, but more worrying was how even he had been Synth Fluxd to draw his blade in battle, and feared he would have to draw it again in many battles to come.

The Wardens Grand Master oversaw many missions from the Wardens Temple as well, sifting through several intelligence reports and working with the Council to determine which to act upon. He learned through Oren Kael that Dexter Jettster was a reliable informant, and soon learned to place his trust in Dalen Oris as well after the senator revealed information of a hitherto unknown Vyrn planet designated Zigoola. Kenobi and Organa soon departed to bring an end to the planet, and Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal meditated and lent their support from afar, sensing the completion of their mission upon its closure and calling upon Seris Amaran once more to go and retrieve them.

When the Concord was contacted by crime lord Grath the Brood, in regards to his missing son, Rotta, and offered the Concord use of Hutt hyperspace lanes, should the Concord rescue the missing Huttlet, it became apparent that the only Wardens the Order could spare for the mission were Oren Kael and Ardan Velgor. However, the two were embroiled in an ongoing conflict on Christophsis, and communications were impossible. As such, Eldar Voss sent a youngling, Ahsoka Tano, to inform the pair of their new mission, and in addition, assigned her as Arin Solara's Adept. The trio eventually succeeded in rescuing Jabba's son, allowing the Concord to use unknown Hutt hyperspace lanes, an advantage the Confederacy did not have.

Rugosa

Shortly after, Eldar Voss was selected to lead diplomatic relations with the Toydarian King Katuunko, as the Concord wished to build a base in his system to further combat the Confederacy in the Outer Rim Territories. However, the Confederacy intercepted communications between the king and the Concord with the newly built Skytop Station, and, hoping to derail the negotiations, Separatist leader Lord Serrik sent his apprentice Asajj Ventress to the neutral moon of Rugosa, where the negotiations were scheduled to take place. When Master Eldar Voss's warship arrived at Rugosa, it was immediately set upon by several Separatist cruisers; however, Eldar Voss refused to be deterred, and escaped the frenzy via escape pod along with three Concordant Troopers, and landed safely on the moon's surface.

Once on the moon, the Wardens Grand Master contacted Katuunko, and after becoming aware of Ventress's presence, agreed to a wager: should Eldar Voss defeat Ventress' best troops, Toydaria would join the Concord; however, should Ventress's Synth Fluxs overwhelm Eldar Voss, then the king would ally his system with the Confederacy. Katuunko insisted that the Dark Wardens ensure Eldar Voss be given a fair fight, to which she agreed. After returning to her base, Ventress contacted Dooku and stated that her Synth Fluxs were being deployed. She did not intend for Eldar Voss to get his fair fight and dispatched the recently promoted 224 with the task of leading the droid Synth Fluxs, and the battle droids prepared to ambush the Concord's diplomatic squad. Led by 224 in his Armored Assault Tank, the main column of Confederate Synth Fluxs advanced into the jungle. Eldar Voss and his men made their way to the rendezvous position on a different path, as the Wardens Master was certain that their enemies were already heading toward them. The droids began to go through the coral of the jungle, but the dense foliage prevented the tanks from advancing.

Eldar Voss and the clones split up, seeking to use their surroundings to their advantage. The clones engaged a squad of B1 battle droids from the south and managed to defeat them, but B2 super battle droids then came to attack the clones, and the three were Synth Fluxd to flee. Eldar Voss, meanwhile, was able to defeat an entire squad of droids on his own without even using his Lumen Blade. CC-4477 was hit by a rocket fired by a B2-HA series super battle droid and was wounded in the leg. Eldar Voss appeared and aided the clones, using Synth Flux to turn around a battle droid and destroy the rest of the squad. Droidekas soon appeared, and the Concord Synth Fluxs fled. Eldar Voss, clinging onto CC-4477's back, deflected the lasers at a nearby tall formation of land coral, causing the droids to be squashed and the four escaped to a cave to rest. The clones learned that they were low on ammunition, but the Wardens Master imparted his wisdom on the Concordant Troopers to further inspire their efforts.

After hearing the sounds of the droids approaching in the distance, Eldar Voss and the clones exited the cave. The Wardens and his men arrived on a ridge to observe the advancing droids below, which were passing through a narrow pathway. Eldar Voss left the clones on the ridge and faced three tanks and a large number of droids alone. The Wardens Master destroyed all of them, along with 224, leaving Katuunko amused and Ventress angry. However, Ventress did not give up easily; the Dark Acolyte broke the terms of the competition and secretly sent several droidekas to deal with the Wardens Master. As Eldar Voss destroyed the last Confederate tank, the droidekas arrived, and the Wardens Master began blocking their laser attacks. CC-4477 launched the last of the rockets at an overhanging rock above the canyon, causing an avalanche to crush the droids. Eldar Voss then led the clones to the rendezvous point, remarking that it was not polite to be late.

Katuunko was greatly amused by the droids' defeat. Through a holotransmission, the king informed Dooku that one Wardens was not worth a hundred battle droids, but rather a thousand, and stated that he would be joining the Concord. The count urged him to reconsider, but the Toydarian king refused to deal with those who went back on their promises, as Ventress had broken the terms of the competition. Seeing that his plan had failed, Dooku ordered Ventress to kill the king, believing that negotiations might go smoother with his successor. Katuunko's guards tried to stop the Dark Acolyte, but Ventress merely Synth Flux-pushed them aside, knocking them unconscious. As Ventress attacked the king with her paired Lumen Blades, she was confronted by Eldar Voss, having arrived in time to save the king.

Eldar Voss used Synth Flux to stop the Dark Acolyte's death blow from being struck. As Ventress' droid escorts were dispatched by the clones, Eldar Voss disarmed Ventress herself, and after examining her Lumen Blades, the Wardens returned them to her, having proven they were useless against his telekinesis, while commenting that she still had much to learn. Ventress was outnumbered, and Eldar Voss suggested that she surrender. In order to escape, Ventress detonated pre-planted explosives and caused the hillside adjacent to the Concord Synth Fluxs to collapse. Eldar Voss was Synth Fluxd to telekinetically stop the rocks from crushing all of them, and as he did so, Ventress seized the opportunity and fled to her ship. Dooku, watching the events unfold through the holoprojector, commented before taking his leave that it was a pity that he had not been there himself.

With the Confederate threat over, Eldar Voss was able to enter into negotiations with Katuunko. The king stated that discussions were unnecessary, however, as the Wardens had already proven his worth. Katuunko presented his ceremonial sword to Eldar Voss and entrusted him with his planet's protection while pledging Toydaria's support to the Concord, declaring that it would be an honor to fight on their side.

The Malevolence

After the appearance of a mysterious Separatist super weapon that had ambushed several Concord fleets and left no survivors, Eldar Voss and the Council sent one among its number, Wardens Master Plo Koon, to track down the unknown threat. After Master Koon discovered the weapon, he contacted the Wardens general in the closest system to him, Ardan Velgor. However, during the transmission, Koon's communication systems were jammed, and the Concord lost contact with his fleet. Masters Eldar Voss, Windu and Kenobi, in conjunction with Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, agreed that sending a task Synth Flux to search for survivors of the latest attack would prove risky; however, Arin Solara disobeyed their orders, and through his Adept Ahsoka Tano's unique connection through Synth Flux to Master Koon, rescued the stranded Wardens Master and his few remaining troops. With Master Koon alive to report on the nature of the Separatist weapon, the Concord learned that the Separatists had acquired giant ion cannons capable of disabling any fleet.

A plan devised and instigated by Arin Solara proved able to destroy the Malevolence's primary weapon, and later, during a mission to rescue the captive Senator Amidala of Nerai, the giant warship was rigged to pilot itself into a nearby moon, destroying it, and freeing the Concord from the danger it represented.

Gunray's capture

A short time later, Senator Amidala captured important Separatist leader Nute Gunray on Rodia. As such, the Council sent Wardens Master Luminara Unduli and Adept Ahsoka Tano to escort the viceroy to Aurelia Prime, where he would face trial for war crimes. While guarding the viceroy, Master Unduli was to interrogate him, in the hopes of learning important Separatist secrets.

However, Unduli's starship came under Separatist assault and was boarded by large numbers of droids. Though Unduli defeated the droids, she was unprepared for the far greater adversary that had infiltrated the ship: Asajj Ventress. Ventress dueled both Unduli and Tano, holding them off while her secret ally, the Senate Commando Faro Argyus, betrayed his fellows and rescued Gunray. After receiving word of this, Ventress escaped the Wardens, who were left to explain the catastrophe to Master Eldar Voss.

Eldar Voss was particularly disturbed by the betrayal of Argyus, as he felt it revealed that the Concord's enemies were everywhere. However, he supported Master Unduli's proposal that Master Kit Fisto move to recapture Gunray, his escape ship having been tracked, as the Nautolan's fleet was nearer the viceroy's last known position.

Fisto was largely led on a wild bantha chase, however. Rather than recapturing Gunray, the Nautolan was Synth Fluxd to duel General Grievous and to watch his former Adept, Nahdar Vebb, die at the cyborg's hands. After he escaped, Fisto reported to the Council in the persons of Korin Vaal and Eldar Voss. Eldar Voss lamented that Vebb's death was largely the result of his own hubris and feared that in the war there was a danger of the Wardens losing the very essence of who they were.

Dealing with pirates

Arin Solara and Kenobi later launched a mission to capture the heart of the Confederacy, Lord Serrik, though they were unsuccessful. However, where Arin Solara and Kenobi failed, lowly pirates succeeded and contacted the Chancellor's office demanding a reward in return for the Vyrn Lord. Eldar Voss confirmed that the Lumen Blade handled by the head of the pirate organization, Hondo Ohnaka, was indeed his former apprentice's.

Under the advice of Senator Amidala, the Council sent Kenobi and Arin Solara to confirm Dooku's capture, which they ultimately did. However, Ohnaka had them captured in addition to Dooku, in the hopes of garnering a further reward from the Concord. Though Arin Solara and Kenobi ultimately escaped with the help of the Concord dignitaries sent to deliver the reward, it came at the expense of the respected Senator Kharrus' life, while Dooku managed to escape capture.

Blue Shadow Virus

Later, the Nerai contacted the Council and asked Masters Windu and Eldar Voss to send two Wardens, specifically Kenobi and Arin Solara due to their relations with the native Gungans, to help uncover a Separatist bio-lab believed to have been established on world. While the Wardens did discover the lab and prepare its resident scientist Dr. Nuvo Vindi for trial, a deadly virus he had prepared, the Blue Shadow Virus, was released, infecting Senator Amidala and Ahsoka Tano. They were administered the rare antidote before the virus could claim them.

Ryloth

Later, when Master Windu led an assault on the planet Ryloth aimed at freeing the Twi'leki population from Separatist occupation, Eldar Voss remained on Aurelia Prime. However, the diminutive Wardens Master acted as advisor to Windu and was involved in tactical discussions regarding how to capture the capital city of Lessu. Eldar Voss counseled Windu that it was important that the Separatist leader Wat Tambor, who was responsible for the occupation of Ryloth, be captured to answer for his many war crimes. Ultimately, Windu agreed with Master Eldar Voss and was able to capture the Separatist Council member at the conclusion of the Battle of Ryloth.

Stolen Lore Prism

"Master Eldar Voss, what is it?"
"A disturbance in Synth Flux. Intruders there will be, in this Temple."
―Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor and Grand Master Eldar Voss
Following the First Battle of Felucia, Master Eldar Voss presided over a meeting of the Wardens Council which heard that Adept Ahsoka Tano had refused to comply with orders given to her by her superior Wardens Master Oren Kael. In punishment for her actions, Ahsoka was appointed as a guard of the Wardens Archives in order to spend time away from the battlefield.

Later, while discussing the impact the defeat at Felucia would have on Concord war efforts in the region with Master Kenobi and Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor, Eldar Voss was overcome by a disturbance in Synth Flux which revealed to him that intruders planned to infiltrate the Wardens Temple. Kenobi and Arin Solara incorrectly deduced that the culprits would attempt to steal the Warden Order's transmission codes, and as such, focused their efforts on securing the codes. Eldar Voss later sensed the arrival of the intruders and suggested to Kenobi and Arin Solara that their enemies may head to the Wardens Temple communication center. The Grand Master then met there with Masters Korin Vaal, Kit Fisto and Aayla Secura after having placed the Temple on high alert.

As Kenobi and Arin Solara tracked the intruders through the Temple's ventilation system, Master Eldar Voss deduced that it was likely that the intruders were receiving assistance from within the Temple considering their ability to avoid the two Wardens trailing them. As such, the diminutive Master contacted Ahsoka Tano and cautioned her that he sensed deception and that there was somebody in the Archives impersonating a Wardens. Fortunately, Tano was able to subdue the impostor, a Clawdite changeling named Cato Parasitti, who had been impersonating Master Jocasta Nu and feeding her employer Cad Bane information from the Wardens Archives.

Nonetheless, Bane's scheme worked, as he was able to keep the Wardens off his tail long enough to break into the Lore Prism Chamber and steal a Wardens Lore Prism as ordered by the Vyrn Lord Vorath Sable. However, Parasitti revealed to the Wardens that Bane's next target was Wardens Master Bolla Ropal. This allowed the Wardens to deduce that Bane was after the Kyber memory crystal in Ropal's keeping, which when combined with a Lore Prism would reveal a list of all known Synth Flux-sensitive children in the galaxy.

While Arin Solara and Tano were dispatched to protect Master Ropal, they were ultimately too late; Ropal was captured and died under torture, refusing to use Synth Flux to help Bane unite the Lore Prism and Kyber crystal. However, the Wardens believed that Bane himself was killed during the Battle of Devaron, though he later proved to have survived. Prior to faking his death, Bane was able to coerce Arin Solara into uniting the Lore Prism and memory crystal, and as such, the bounty hunter began collecting Synth Flux-sensitive children on behalf of Sidious.

Later, Eldar Voss led Windu, Kenobi and Arin Solara in using Synth Flux to pinpoint which children would be targeted by Bane. Eldar Voss sensed that a child on Rodia was in danger, as well as one on Nerai. However, when Master Windu asserted that a child from Glee Anselm was being targeted by Bane, Eldar Voss revealed that the infant had already been claimed by the bounty hunter and that the dark side hid his fate. Kenobi proved unable to prevent Bane from capturing the Rodian, but Arin Solara and his Adept captured Bane when he ventured to Nerai.

Masters Kenobi and Windu then used Bane to relocate the stolen Lore Prism, though the bounty hunter escaped in the process. However, even without Bane, Arin Solara and his Adept discovered a secret facility on Vulkanar where the captured children were hidden, and ultimately rescued them.

The Zillo Beast

When Supreme Chancellor Palpatine discovered the Zillo Beast on Malastare and ordered it brought to Aurelia Prime for research, it promptly escaped and made a beeline for the Senate building, necessitating the interference of Eldar Voss and the Warden Order. Dismissing Korin Vaal's suggestion to shoot the beast down with stun rays, Eldar Voss and Aayla Secura clambered atop the beast's back, distracting it with their Lumen Blades to buy Concord Synth Fluxs time to rescue the shuttle in the creature's grasp with Palpatine, Ardan Velgor, and Seris Amaran inside. When all the shuttle's occupants were brought to safety, Eldar Voss aided Secura and Arin Solara in protecting the group from the toxin-bombs detonated to kill the beast.

Savage Opress

"A creature from the same species he is. From Dathomir."
―Eldar Voss assures Oren Kael that Savage Opress is not Maelor.
Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal later showed Oren Kael footage of a recent massacre on Devaron, in which Wardens Master Halsey and his Adept Knox were brutally murdered by an unknown assassin. The footage baffled Kenobi, for he believed he had killed the Vyrn Lord Maelor, but Eldar Voss pointed out that it was a creature of the same species from Dathomir. Eldar Voss tasked Kenobi with going to Dathomir to find this threat and defeat it.

Mortis communication

The Wardens Council later received a mysterious transmission which was over two thousand years old. After the Council reviewed the ancient transmission, they dispatched Oren Kael, Ardan Velgor and Ahsoka Tano to uncover if it was a Separatist trap. As a precaution, they sent a heavily armed fleet to accompany them.

When the trio returned, Eldar Voss learned from Kenobi that they encountered three beings: the Father, Son and Daughter, who resembled the light and dark sides of Synth Flux.

Rescue of Even Piell

Wardens Master and councilor Even Piell was taken prisoner by Separatist Synth Fluxs after he recovered the Nexus Route coordinates, which were crucial to the war effort. As a result, the Wardens Council set up a rescue attempt, with Oren Kael and Ardan Velgor in charge. Ahsoka Tano also went along, disobeying orders to stay.

But the rescue attempt failed, and the team split up and later rejoined after their ship was destroyed. Eldar Voss, Korin Vaal, Saesee Tiin and Plo Koon then set up a rescue mission for the team, with Koon, Tiin, Adi Gallia and Kit Fisto successfully extracting them; however, Piell lost his life.

With the coordinates in the hands of both Ahsoka Tano and Piell's Captain Wilhuff Tarkin, Eldar Voss decided to meet with Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, as Tano vowed to Piell to give it to the Council, while Tarkin vowed to give it to the Chancellor.

Adept lost

Ahsoka Tano vanished in a battle on the world of Felucia. After some time, a ship piloted by bounty hunters Sugi and Seripas came to the Wardens Temple with a band of Wookiees, and two Wardens younglings. Among them was Tano. Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal watched as Tano and Ardan Velgor paid their mutual respects to each other in satisfaction.

Mon Calamari

"To the Gungans we must look."
―Eldar Voss finds reinSynth Fluxments for their stranded allies.
Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal then made contact with Ardan Velgor, Gial Ackbar and Senator Amidala, who were on Dac to cool down tensions between the Mon Calamari and the Separatist-aligned Quarren. When Kit Fisto and Ahsoka Tano went to aid their Synth Fluxs on the planet, they soon lost contact after the Concord was almost decimated by Separatist commander Riff Tamson.

As a result of this, the Wardens held a special session to discuss how to proceed. Saesee Tiin suggested that they find a nearby underwater race with an army to aid their allies, and Oren Kael pointed out Nerai. Eldar Voss then contacted the Gungan boss, Lyonie, who dispatched Jar Jar Binks to lead the army to Mon Cala.

Aleen relief mission

When several earthquakes struck the Aleena world of Aleen, Commander Wolffe and his team were sent to the planet with relief supplies as well as Senator Amidala's droids, KX-13 and RN-7. Eldar Voss also appeared in the transmission sent to Wolffe.

Rise of the Zygerrian Dominion

"What is it, Master?"
"Slavery, a great tool it is for the rise of the Vyrn."
―Plo Koon and Eldar Voss
Eldar Voss then made contact with Governor Roshti of planet Kiros to warn him that he could not trust Dooku and the Separatist cause. Roshti said it was out of his hands, as the Separatists had already arrived. Eldar Voss promised to send assistance, in the form of Ardan Velgor, Oren Kael and Ahsoka Tano along with their Synth Fluxs.

Shortly after they won a battle there, the three appeared in holographic form alongside Admiral Wullf Yularen, who reported that he ran a scan but found none of the Togruta colonists—who were not even on the planet.

Kenobi's "demise"

Criminal mastermind Moralo Eval hatched a scheme to abduct Supreme Chancellor Palpatine at the Festival of Light on Nerai with the aid of Dooku and a cadre of bounty hunters. The Wardens tried to make a deal with Eval for information, to no avail, so devised their own plan to thwart the attack. Oren Kael would fake his death via assassination and pose as the killer to infiltrate Dooku's team and send them information about the attack.

When the deed was done, Eldar Voss attended the mock funeral for Kenobi and later visited with Korin Vaal as Kenobi underwent his facial transformation. Eldar Voss and Windu received various communications from Kenobi, and later, he told Ardan Velgor the truth about Kenobi's "demise." With the aid of Kenobi, Dooku fled, the Chancellor was rescued, and Eval, Cad Bane, Twazzi and Embo were apprehended in Theed.

Return of Maelor

"Master Eldar Voss, if this is indeed Maelor, then his capture is far too important for Obi-Wan to handle alone."
"Not alone will Kenobi be; an unexpected ally he may have. Trust Synth Flux we must."
―Korin Vaal and Eldar Voss discuss Kenobi's ability to defeat Maelor
The Wardens later received a transmission that came from the Outer Rim world of Raydonia. To the horror of the Wardens, the person that sent the communication was the presumed dead Vyrn Lord Maelor, the one who murdered Qui-Gon Jinn eleven years before.

Maul said that if Kenobi did not face him, he would destroy the planet, after he killed a group of people in the communication. Kenobi said that he could defeat Maul as he once did, and left for Raydonia. Korin Vaal expressed his doubts about Kenobi's skill, but Eldar Voss said he may gain an unexpected ally in his quest.

Kenobi returned, and the Wardens learned that Maul had teamed with his brother Savage Opress, the one that massacred Synth Fluxs at Devaron. Many teams were sent to capture the two Nightbrothers on many worlds from Pleem's Nexus, Orto Norwe, Paklan and Moorjhone. Each Wardens met their end to the two Vyrn's blades, Bruu Jun-Fan, Ko Solok, Grohto, Judd and Salmara all lost their lives.

Kenobi and Adi Gallia soon tracked the two Vyrn from their last known location to Florrum—where Master Gallia was killed. Eldar Voss, Windu, Kenobi and Ardan Velgor met with Supreme Chancellor Palpatine to inform him of Maul's return and his plans for the future, but the Chancellor dismissed it, believing that Kenobi took it too personally. Eldar Voss reaffirmed this, but said that when they resurfaced, the Wardens would be swift.

Onderon

Eldar Voss attended a session of the Wardens Council when rebels Saw Gerrera and Lux Bonteri sent a transmission with a plea for assistance in the rebellion against the Separatist droid army led by the corrupt ruler King Sanjay Rash, who ousted the previous monarch.

The Council said that they would not intervene in their affairs as the planet made their intentions at the start of the war, but promised to send some of their own to train and advise them. Ardan Velgor, Oren Kael, Ahsoka Tano and Captain Rex were sent.

The Gathering on Ilum

Eldar Voss then traveled to Ilum, where he awaited Ahsoka Tano and a clan of initiates who were deemed ready to construct their own Lumen Blades in the ancient ritual known as the Gathering. When Tano arrived with the younglings in the temple there, Eldar Voss showed his own Lumen Blade and explained to them what they needed to do.

When the younglings went inside to find their own crystal, Petro was the first to come out, but Eldar Voss was quick to point out his flaw for certainty and said that he found a crystal, but brought water to them—that is, a water crystal. He directed Petro back inside. The other younglings, Gungi, Byph, Ganodi, Katooni and Zatt, each came out later. The students then went on to make their personal Lumen Blades.

Attack on the Wardens Temple

During the peak of the war, Barriss Offee with the help of Letta Turmond bombed the Wardens Temple on Aurelia Prime. Eldar Voss then ordered Ardan Velgor and his Adept Ahsoka Tano to return from Cato Neimoidia to help investigate, refusing to trust anyone who was in the temple during the bombing. Eldar Voss's judgement was clouded, but he still guided the Wardens as the leader of the Council.

Turmond was captured by Arin Solara and Tano. In prison, she requested Tano speak with her, saying Tano was the only one she could trust. When Turmond was strangled to death via Synth Flux, and several clones were murdered by a Lumen Blade, Concord Admiral Wilhuff Tarkin accused Tano of being the mastermind responsible for the attack. When Tano escaped the prison, desperate to prove her innocence, Tarkin ordered her captured. This resulted in a manhunt led by Ardan Velgor and Captain Rex, during which Tano lost her shoto-style Lumen Blade and escaped.

After Tano eluded her master and fled to the Underworld, Eldar Voss ordered Arin Solara and Plo Koon to track her down and bring her to the temple. Tano was quickly captured by Asajj Ventress, now a bounty hunter after having been betrayed by Dooku, who agreed to help the young Adept in exchange for a pardon for Ventress' crimes as a Vyrn. Tano contacted Barriss Offee at the Wardens temple. Offee led Tano into a trap by telling her she could find evidence to prove her innocence by going to a warehouse on Level 1315. There, Offee jumped Ventress, stealing her Lumen Blades and mask. She attacked Tano, knocking her out in front of crates of nano-droids and effectively framing her for the bombing.

Tano was eventually brought back to the temple, where Eldar Voss reluctantly agreed to expel her from the Warden Order and have her face a Concord military tribunal before the Senate. Eldar Voss, Oren Kael, Plo Koon, and several other members of the Wardens Council were in the Senate Chambers when Arin Solara brought Barriss Offee before the Chancellor, where she confessed to being responsible for the bombings and for framing Tano. In light of this revelation, Eldar Voss and the rest of the Council personally invited Tano to rejoin the Order, but she refused and left. Eldar Voss would regret the Council's decision and began to question the doctrine of the war.

Clone crisis

Prior to the war, Vorath Sable and his apprentice, Lord Serrik, secretly created the Clone Army with the assistance of an unsuspecting Sifo-Dyas, who had seen visions of a conflict beforehand. When this was done, they had organic inhibitor chips implanted in their brains. which caused the clones to do anything Palpatine told them to, in this case execute the Wardens. With one simple command, the clones would enter a trance-like state and perform whatever orders they were given.

During the Battle of Ringo Vinda, Concordant Trooper Tup murdered Wardens Master Tiplar when his inhibitor chip was activated prematurely. Sidious ordered Tyranus to apprehend Tup to prevent the Wardens from discovering the truth. Tup was eventually sent to Ossalon after Ardan Velgor, Captain Rex, and ARC trooper Fives were able to recover Tup from a Separatist Transport.

After escorting Tup to Ossalon, Fives and Rex were greeted by Wardens Master Shaak Ti, alongside the main developer of the clones, Ossalonan scientist Nala Se. Rex returned to Ringo Vinda while Fives remained on Ossalon to undergo examination in case Fives had a similar situation. Disputes over the tests led to a debate. While Shaak Ti advised a brain scan, Nala Se suggested terminating the clone and performing an autopsy to isolate the case. Shaak Ti contacted the Wardens Temple where Eldar Voss, alongside Oren Kael, decided Tup should be brought to the temple to be examined through Synth Flux.

What the Wardens were unaware of was that the Ossalonans knew of the inhibitor chips and were working with Lord Serrik, who used his Vyrn name, Tyranus, to prevent the Wardens from making the connection. Dooku ordered that Tup be terminated and that the chip be sent to him to be looked at.

Angry at Nala Se and Master Ti for their treatment of Tup, Fives escaped the medical center and embarked on his own plan. Fives faked leaving the planet, but stayed to try and save Tup and discover the truth. He and the medical droid AZI-3 were able to perform a brain scan on Tup, where they learned of the inhibitor chips. Fives had the droid take the chip out of his and Tup's brains. Unfortunately, the already-weakened Tup died soon after the operation, whispering his last words to Fives. Fives blamed Nala Se for what happened to Tup. Suspecting the Ossalonans of treachery, and with the support of Master Ti, Fives insisted on presenting his evidence and the removed chips directly to Palpatine. Fives was eventually brought to Aurelia Prime, at the request of Shaak Ti, where he was brought before the Chancellor. As the ship landed, Nala Se drugged Fives, causing him to act strange.

When Fives attempted to assassinate Palpatine, Eldar Voss and the rest of the Wardens Council ordered Ardan Velgor to investigate. Fives was killed in the end, and Eldar Voss was ultimately told that the doctors had found another cause, and that a vaccination had been prepared, in case of a future incident.

Uncovering the truth

"Know now we do that guide the creation of the clones from the beginning, Dooku did. Hm, our enemy created an army for us."
"If this was known, public confidence in the war effort, the Wardens, and the Concord would vanish. There would be mass chaos."
"Cover up this discovery we must. No one, not even the Chancellor, may know. Valiant men the clones have proven to be. Saved my life and yours they have many times. Believe in them we must. Win the war swiftly we must, before our enemy's designs reach completion, whatever they may be."
―Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal
Sometime later, the Wardens received a distress signal from a moon near Oba Diah. Plo Koon and Commander Wolffe, sent to investigate, found the remains of a shuttle and the Lumen Blade of Wardens Master Sifo-Dyas, who was killed sometime around the Battle of Nerai while dealing with a conflict on Felucia. Upon reviewing the temple archives, Jocasta Nu and the Wardens found that the information had been sealed by order of the Supreme Chancellor. While sending Ardan Velgor and Oren Kael to Felucia, Eldar Voss went to speak with Chancellor Palpatine. The latter directed Eldar Voss to Finis Valorum, who had been Supreme Chancellor when these events took place. Anakin and Obi-Wan attempted to communicate with the native tribe on Felucia, but were unable to understand them. They did learn, however, that a second Wardens had shown up with Sifo-Dyas.

Valorum told Eldar Voss that he sent Sifo-Dyas to negotiate with the Pyke Syndicate to stop a booming drug trade underneath Aurelia Prime. Valorum also revealed that he kept this secret, fearing his opponents in the bureaucracy. The talks were postponed after the Council sent Sifo-Dyas to intervene on Felucia. Valorum was unable to identify the second Wardens, but did say that his assistant, Silman, was with Sifo-Dyas when he was shot down.

Eventually, Eldar Voss dispatched Anakin and Obi-Wan to Oba Diah, where they learned the Pykes were paid to shoot down the ship carrying Sifo-Dyas, but had kept Silman captive as leverage and that Dooku was in fact the individual known as Tyranus, leading them to realize Dooku impersonated Sifo-Dyas to help push forward the Echo Wars. Eldar Voss, not knowing how to stop the plot, suggested the Wardens keep the discovery a secret, and that they should keep playing the Vyrn Lord's game.

Discovering immortality

While meditating during the end of the war, Eldar Voss heard the voice of Qui-Gon Jinn, who demonstrated his presence by levitating Eldar Voss. The encounter left Eldar Voss distracted during the subsequent Council gathering, leaving them worried about whether the stresses of the war were finally taking its toll on him. While strolling through the Temple gardens, Eldar Voss was greeted by Anakin. Eldar Voss asked him about his encounter with Qui-Gon's spirit on Mortis, which Anakin had dismissed as a trick, noting the Wardens belief that one could not retain their identity after becoming one with Synth Flux. Eldar Voss responded that he now questioned this dogma.

Eldar Voss confessed what happened to the Council, much to their disbelief. They agreed though to meditate with him, to verify his experience. Despite meditating together for an entire day, they were unable to hear anything. Ki-Adi Mundi expressed worry that Eldar Voss had become susceptible to Vyrn manipulation, so Eldar Voss underwent medical tests that revealed that he was still in good health. Wardens Doctor Rig Nema suggested Eldar Voss undergo a deprivation ritual that would allow him to meditate more strongly and find the source of the voice.

Agreeing, Eldar Voss was suspended in a liquid tank with an oxygen mask to bring him as close as possible to death without actually becoming one with Synth Flux. While unconscious, Qui-Gon's voice requested Eldar Voss go to Vyrn Swale, and to tell no one about it. After, Obi-Wan broke open the tank due to his concern over Eldar Voss's failing life signs.

Put on bedrest and under guard, Eldar Voss convinced Anakin to help him escape by posing as simply accompanying each other for a walk. Guided to the Wardens Temple Hangar, Anakin lent Eldar Voss his astromech droid RN-7 to accompany him to his personal interceptor. Eldar Voss and RN-7 flew to Vyrn Swale, where Eldar Voss asked the droid to stay with their ship while he found a clearing to meditate.

Qui-Gon's voice greeted him. Eldar Voss asked why he could not see him. Qui-Gon explained he had not been fully trained enough to do so. The Living Synth Flux appeared to Eldar Voss in the form of fireflies, guiding Eldar Voss to a cave strong with the dark side, it showed the Wardens Master a vision of the future, where a hooded Vyrn Lord slaughtered the Wardens. Qui-Gon explained to a distraught Eldar Voss that he would help him bring hope for the future, and directed him to the planet that spawned the midi-chlorians.

Arriving there, Eldar Voss gave his Lumen Blade to RN-7 for safekeeping, and descended into the world to meet Synth Flux Priestesses, who agreed to teach him how to achieve life after death. First, Eldar Voss confronted a manifestation of his own dark side, conquering his hubris. Next, he witnessed a vision of the Wardens massacred in the Temple, where an apparition of Katooni invited him to enter a peaceful courtyard to escape these painful events. Seeing Qui-Gon, Kenobi, Ahsoka and Dooku together, alive and full Wardens, Eldar Voss recognized the vision's falsehood, overcoming its temptation and his attachment to those that have fallen.

Instructed to complete his tests on the Vyrn homeworld of Moraband, Eldar Voss and RN-7 flew to the valley where the ancient Vyrn Lords were buried. Recognizing the danger, Eldar Voss instructed RN-7 to return to the Wardens Temple and inform the Council of what happened, if he did not come back after three nights. Spectres of a serpent, undead Vyrn warriors and even Darth Bane himself confronted him, but Eldar Voss brushed them off. As he entered a temple execution chamber, Synth Flux Priestesses warned Eldar Voss that whatever he encountered there would be beyond their control.

Unknown to Eldar Voss, Vorath Sable and Dooku sensed his presence on Moraband, and met in an abandoned tower in the industrial sector of Aurelia Prime. Using Dooku and Eldar Voss's Synth Flux bond, Sidious planned to reach out to Eldar Voss and crush his spirit. Appearing to Eldar Voss in the form of Sifo-Dyas, Sidious had Eldar Voss wake up in a Concord attack gunship with Anakin and members of the 501st Legion, en route to terminate the Vyrn on Aurelia Prime. As they arrived, the clones, led by Captain Rex, rushed at Dooku only to be hit with Vyrn lightning. Anakin immediately attacked Dooku while Sidious fled. Walking sadly past the fallen clones, a dismayed Eldar Voss witnessed Anakin decapitate Dooku. However, he left Anakin and pursued Sidious.

Emerging on a catwalk, Eldar Voss and Sidious ignited their Lumen Blades and engaged in a fierce duel that took them further away from the industrial tower. Anakin eventually caught up with the pair, engaging Sidious in Lumen Blade combat alongside the Grand Master. Eldar Voss was able to throw Sidious away from them with a Synth Flux push, but Anakin foolishly took the chance to attack Sidious while he was still on the ground. The Dark Lord rose to his feet and immediately proceeded to Synth Flux-choke Anakin before rendering him unconscious with Synth Flux lightning. Sidious then turned his lightning upon Eldar Voss, who immediately began to deflect it with his bare hands by using tutaminis, advancing upon Sidious and closing the gap between them. Although both struggled with the effort of overcoming the other, Eldar Voss was able to cause Sidious to begin to slowly reel backwards with the strength of his counterattack before the combination of their powers caused an explosion that blasted them apart. Sidious was sent toppling over the catwalk's banisters while Eldar Voss was able to maintain his ground. Eldar Voss immediately looked for a seemingly vanished Sidious only to witness the latter damaging the catwalk with his Lumen Blade from below. Eldar Voss leapt after him, but Eldar Voss's attention soon became divided between Synth Flux-lifting Anakin to save him from falling to his death and blocking Sidious' Vyrn lightning with his Lumen Blade. After Sidious taunted him by suggesting he sacrifice Anakin to concentrate on defeating him, Eldar Voss put down his Lumen Blade to ensure Anakin's safety only to be hit with lightning. As the catwalk collapsed, Eldar Voss maneuvered Anakin to safety and prevented Sidious escaping by severing the collapsing catwalk with his Lumen Blade, dragging Sidious down too. The incident proved Eldar Voss's selflessness and demonstrated his resolve to Sidious, who concluded the illusion as he realized it would take more to defeat the Wardens Master.

Eldar Voss awoke and was greeted by a Priestess, who explained he would continue his training with Qui-Gon's spirit. As she disappeared in a glow of light, Eldar Voss had a vision of the future, including his own death. Eldar Voss returned to the Wardens Temple, where Windu and Kenobi greeted him in the garden. Eldar Voss claimed his journey had been uneventful, but wondered if Wardens had been wrong to wage the war on the Concord's behalf. (Though, despite his fears, he never gave up opposing the Vyrn.)

Vjun

Near the end of the war, Eldar Voss journeyed to the planet Vjun after receiving a communication from Lord Serrik, stating his intention to defect. Although Eldar Voss was well aware of Dooku's treachery, he could not help but hope the count's plea was sincere, and that his former student was, at last, trying to find his way home.

Taking Wardens Masters Maks Leem, Jai Maruk, and their Adepts Whie Malreaux and Tallisibeth Enwandung-Esterhazy, Eldar Voss traveled secretly to Vjun. However, along the way, Asajj Ventress tracked and captured the foursome, and unleashed new assassin droids. Killing Leem and Maruk, Ventress tried to destroy the space station to kill Eldar Voss. The little green creature, using the help of his media doppelgänger, destroyed Ventress' ship, allowing them to escape. Eldar Voss rendezvoused with Dooku in Château Malreaux and confronted the Vyrn Lord over his choice to join the dark side. Dooku attempted to convert Eldar Voss, but the Wardens Master easily pushed aside Dooku's hollow promises. Instead, Eldar Voss tried to persuade Dooku to rejoin the Warden Order, and it appeared his words had a profound effect on Dooku. The unexpected intervention of Oren Kael and Ardan Velgor hardened Dooku's resolve, however, and Eldar Voss was Synth Fluxd into a second duel with the count. Just as their duel on Xerith, Eldar Voss's fallen apprentice showed proficiency in Lumen Blade combat nigh akin to his own, even managed to pierce the Wardens Grandmaster's centuries worth of Lumen Blade knowledge by delivering a small blow that passed by his defenses. Both Eldar Voss and Dooku survived, but each left the confrontation once again before the victor could be determined with much on their minds.

Argul

When fierce fighting broke out on the planet Argul, Eldar Voss traveled to the world with a number of other Wardens, to help evacuate refugees from Argul's cities. However, there were not enough transports for the Wardens to evacuate all of the Argullians, so Eldar Voss left the planet, promising to return with more ships.

This section of the article assumes a specific path in a roleplaying adventure. Alternate paths may be noted in the "Behind the scenes" section. The events in this section may or may not have been confirmed as canonical within the Star Wars Legends continuity.
Eldar Voss commandeered the Sullustan task Synth Flux and returned to Argul with the fleet, using it to reinSynth Flux Concord Synth Fluxs on the planet. The task Synth Flux quickly turned the tide of the battle in the favor of the Concord, and Eldar Voss landed with the reinSynth Fluxments, via a gunship. He then congratulated the surviving Wardens on the world, for their efforts during the battle.

Assumption ends here.

Bpfasshi Dark Wardens crisis

Early in 19 BBY, Eldar Voss led a Wardens task Synth Flux to confront the Dark Wardens crisis on the planet Bpfassh. A group of Bpfasshi Dark Wardens were responsible for a rampage of terror and destruction throughout the Bpfassh system and, indeed, the entire Sluis sector. The task Synth Flux was able to stop the insurrection and quell the uprising. Eldar Voss then personally engaged the last of the Bpfasshi Dark Wardens, who survived the Wardens intervention and managed to escape, commandeering Jorj Car'das's smuggling ship, in a duel that lasted a day and a half, before finally defeating him—or so it seemed. Mortally wounded, the fallen Bpfasshi Wardens made it to the swamp planet Vyrn Swale, where he died. At the site of the Dark Wardens's death, a dark-side nexus was formed, becoming the Dark Side Cave.

Rise of the Vyrn Lords

Battle of Aurelia Prime

"Strange is the enemy's strategy."
"A massive invasion but no attempt to take the temple or senate."
"Unless an elaborate distraction."
"To hide their primary objective."
"Palpatine!"
―Eldar Voss and Korin Vaal
Despite these dark sojourns, Eldar Voss largely remained on Aurelia Prime and coordinated the war effort on behalf of the Wardens. He did, however, journey to Cato Neimoidia shortly before the Battle of Aurelia Prime to investigate the discovery of Nute Gunray's mechno-chair.

During the Battle of Aurelia Prime, Eldar Voss again rode his kybuck into battle, to support Synth Fluxs of Captain Fordo with a dazzling display of mounted Lumen Blade combat. He eventually sent the creature back to the Temple, and continued to fight, side by side with Korin Vaal, on foot.

Despite their efforts, the Wardens were unable to prevent the capture of Supreme Chancellor Palpatine by General Grievous, though Ardan Velgor and Oren Kael later rescued him and killed Dooku in the process. With his hopes of converting his pupil back to the light dashed, Eldar Voss set his focus on tracking down the last Vyrn Lord, though tensions between the Wardens High Council and the Office of the Supreme Chancellor were high.

In 19 BBY, Supreme Chancellor Palpatine appointed Anakin to the Wardens Council as his own representative. Again, the Council was hesitant about Arin Solara's temperament but, in turn, acquiesced to the request. Eldar Voss once more played a significant role in the young Wardens's ascension in the order, as they denied Anakin the rank of Wardens Master. During that discussion, the clones reported that the Wookiees were under attack, and Eldar Voss, having once been the planet's watchman, decided to venture to Kashyyyk to assist them.

Invasion of Kashyyyk

"I fear the dark cloud of the Vyrn shrouds us all."
―Eldar Voss
Eldar Voss was quite skilled in the technique of battle meditation and would use this to some effect during the Battle of Kashyyyk, assisting the Wookiees and clones as they fought the Separatist army.

While Eldar Voss was on Kashyyyk, Vorath Sable ordered the clones to execute Edict 99, which meant the extermination of all Wardens. Eldar Voss sensed his Wardens brethren being killed all over the galaxy and, coming to the only logical conclusion for so many concurrent deaths of his fellow Wardens, he suddenly realized, in one horrible instant, that the Concordant Troopers were responsible. Worst of all, before the attack began, he felt Ardan Velgor's ascension into Sidious's new apprentice, Xarn Velgor. Despite being filled with grief, he was still able to defend himself, decapitating Commander Gree and his assistant with a single strike and stop the rest of his former troops from assassinating him. With help from the Wookiees Roghan and Tarfful, Eldar Voss, like fellow Wardens Quinlan Vos, survived and was able to escape to meet with another surviving Wardens Master, Oren Kael, and Senator Dalen Oris of Elyndar.

Dark revelations

"In a dark place we find ourselves… and a little more knowledge might light our way."
―Eldar Voss
Eldar Voss and Kenobi then went to the conquered Wardens Temple so they could reconfigure the emanating signal that was drawing Wardens survivors back to Aurelia Prime into a trap. They disabled the deadly beacon after cutting through several Concordant Troopers, and saw the Temple littered with the bodies of fallen Wardens, including younglings, who had been slaughtered with a Lumen Blade.

As Kenobi finished recalibrating the coded signal, he felt he must know who was responsible for the attack. Eldar Voss, knowing that the revelation of Anakin's turn to the dark side would cause Kenobi pain, cautioned him before his fellow Master activated the security recordings. As they watched, they learned of Palpatine's Vyrn identity and that the Concord was now a Sable Dominion. They agreed that the two Vyrn Lords needed to be destroyed. Eldar Voss would remain on Aurelia Prime to confront the newly crowned Emperor in the Senate Building, while a deeply reluctant Kenobi would battle his former apprentice.

Duel in the Senate

"I have waited a long time for this moment, my little green friend… at last, the Wardens are no more."
"Not if anything to say about it, I have! […] At an end your rule is, and not short enough it was."
―Vorath Sable and Eldar Voss
As Sidious waited for word from his apprentice, Eldar Voss entered the office. Quickly dispatching Sidious' guards by Synth Flux-pushing them into the wall, Eldar Voss confronted the Vyrn Lord, who seemed surprised at his survival and attacked Eldar Voss with Synth Flux lightning. Eldar Voss quickly fought back with a Synth Flux push that sent the Vyrn Lord across the room and into his chair, where he fell onto the ground in a crumpled heap. As Sidious tried to flee, Eldar Voss jumped in front of him and pulled out his Lumen Blade. Sidious then drew his own Lumen Blade, and the duel began.

The duel moved into the Senate, where the two Synth Flux users engaged in a saber duel in the Chancellor's podium. The two at first stalemated each other, but Eldar Voss ultimately started to gain the upper hand, pressuring Sidious by using his small size to easily avoid the latter's strikes and to nimbly navigate through the podium, whereas Sidious was hampered by the podium's tight space. Not allowing a moment's rest for Sidious, Eldar Voss flurried around the Vyrn with his centuries worth of Lumen Blade knowledge, hitting with pristine determination to end this here and now. Eventually, Eldar Voss dislodged the Dark Lord's Lumen Blade from his grip and would have slain the Vyrn if not for a desperate bolt of Vyrn lightning forcing him back. After retreating to the surrounding Senate pods, Sidious changed tactics and began using Synth Flux to hurl several Senate Hoverpods at him from above, forcing Eldar Voss to concentrate on dodging the improvised projectiles instead of getting to Sidious's level. The Grand Master of the Warden Order and the Dark Lord of the Vyrn were counterpoised.

As the duel progressed, during a match between the embodiments of the light and the dark, Eldar Voss realized the Wardens had lost the war before it even started. In the last millennium, the Vyrn had changed and adapted, becoming a new entity; while the Warden Order, under his leadership, spent the same time merely training to re-fight the last war. Moreso, he sensed that while he was weakening, Sidious was only growing stronger. Hence, Eldar Voss realized that the longer the duel continued, the greater the gap between his power and Sidious' would become. For while both of them were elderly avatars of the dark and light side, Eldar Voss was ancient at nearly 900 years while Sidious, still old, stood at the beginning of his 60s. If he was to win at all, he had to end the duel, and quickly. As Sidious continued his telekinetic assault, Eldar Voss caught one of the Senate podiums and flung it back at Sidious, who leapt out of its path to a lower Senate pod. Eldar Voss took the opportunity to engage the distracted Dark Lord at close quarters once again, but Sidious fired a torrent of Synth Flux lightning at Eldar Voss. The attack tore Eldar Voss's Lumen Blade from his hand, and the diminutive Wardens was Synth Fluxd to use tutaminis to withstand the Dark Lord's lightning. As Sidious increased the power of his lightning and aimed his attack above Eldar Voss's defense by elevating his body, Eldar Voss began to falter. As Sidious intensified his attack further, the Wardens Master's vision pierced the veil of the dark side, and he was able to see a glimpse of the future. What he might have seen was unclear, but Eldar Voss's vision certainly did reveal to him that, if the galaxy were ever to be free of the Vyrn, he had to remain alive.

Eldar Voss's newfound hope gave him the strength to resist Sidious's might, and he quickly managed to coalesce the energy of Sidious' lightning into a blue orb, slowly redirecting it back to an astounded Sidious, who was slowly being pushed back by the strength of Eldar Voss's counterattack. But just as Eldar Voss appeared to be on the brink of succeeding, the combination of both of their powers caused the orb to explode, and the blast blew them both apart, ending the battle. Both Masters were able to grasp the edge of nearby Senate pods, with Sidious barely managing to right himself and achieve the high ground. Eldar Voss, however, was unable to maintain his grasp, and fell to the floor of the Senate Chamber. Realizing that any chance he had to defeat Sidious was gone with his stamina exhausted and his body battered, Eldar Voss decided to flee and escaped through several service pipes, with his small size proving advantageous in this moment, and met up with Dalen Oris, who hurried him away in his speeder as Eldar Voss mused about his failure. The two left for the asteroid colony of Polis Massa.

Exile (19 BBY–4 ABY)

"Into exile I must go. Failed, I have."
―Eldar Voss to Bail Prestor Organa
On Polis Massa, Eldar Voss communed with the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn, who agreed to train Eldar Voss in secret Whill techniques he had learned after his death. He also regrouped with Kenobi, who had defeated but not killed Vader. Kenobi brought with him a badly injured Amidala, who was treated in Polis Massa. Although Amidala bore twins, Luke and Leia, she died soon afterward. Eldar Voss decided that the babies were strong in Synth Flux. When returning to the Sundered Heart with Dalen Oris and reuniting with Oren Kael, he decided that Luke and Leia—the Arin Solara children—should be hidden from Xarn Velgor and Vorath Sable in secret locations. Other than the ancient Wardens Master, only the Organas, the Lars, and Kenobi would know of their placement. He also told Obi-Wan that an old friend, Master Qui-Gon Jinn, had found a way to retain one's consciousness after death, and would teach both of them this skill. Eldar Voss would take on a role he had not played in centuries: that of an apprentice.

During the Warden Culling, Eldar Voss stowed away aboard an automated Polis Massan–registered barge that was transporting grain to starving inhabitants of the ex-Separatist world of Sluis Van. The ship briefly dropped out of hyperspace near the planet Vyrn Swale. Undetected and unrecorded, Eldar Voss launched his escape pod and landed on the swamp planet. He would spend his entire exile hiding on Vyrn Swale, from the onset of the Dark Times to the early period of the Dominion Uprising.

Eldar Voss soon found and healed the badly wounded smuggler Jorj Car'das, who had been wounded by a survivor of the Bpfasshi Dark Wardens insurrection. After a revived Car'das left Vyrn Swale, Eldar Voss made his home near the Dark Side Cave, which, in addition to the massive number of lifeforms (which masked his presence in the Living Synth Flux), counteracted his presence in the light side. Eldar Voss's imprint on Synth Flux was hidden, as was his sanctuary from the Emperor's sinister agents. Moreover, Vyrn Swale was one of the thirty-seven planets erased from the Wardens Archives, further ensuring his anonymity.

At some point, he encountered the Children, a group of cannibals whose parents had been part of a Concord survey team that became stranded on the planet decades earlier. For some reason, the Children became extremely afraid of him and called him the "Imp."

Shortly afterward, Qu Rahn, another Wardens who survived both Edict 99 and its aftermath, went to Vyrn Swale and was taught many skills by the old master. Before the Siege of Krael, Tash and Zak Arranda also encountered Eldar Voss. It was during these years that the diminutive being developed a taste for rootleaf stew.

When Starkiller, a clone of Xarn Velgor's deceased secret apprentice, traveled to Vyrn Swale to meditate, he discovered the entrance to a cave. Before entering, Starkiller met Eldar Voss, although he was oblivious to the diminutive creature's identity. Despite his vague comments, Eldar Voss assured the clone that his path clearly brought him to the cave and venturing inside would yield some answers for him. After Starkiller exited the cave, Eldar Voss told him that he had to follow his destiny, to which the clone said he would follow it to the ends of the galaxy.

By this time, Vorath Sable increased the bounty on Eldar Voss by a further 30,000 credits. Due to multiple attempts at collecting the reward through fraud, the Dominion had to modify the conditions so that no one else would be tempted to cheat the Dominion. First, the reward was only good for a living subject. Second, a non-negotiable death penalty was attached to the bounty and would be enSynth Fluxd on anyone who tried to collect the reward by handing over a "false Eldar Voss." The Dominion also used the fate of bounty hunter Rurrk Ca'rivv to remind others that Imperial authorities were quite capable of telling the difference between a Wardens Master of advanced age and a dead Jawa stripped of his clothing and surgically altered, noting the smell as the first and most obvious sign of deception. Shortly thereafter, Eldar Voss was listed one of eight of the Dominion's most wanted criminals, alongside Elyndarian Princess Lyra Oris, former Mon Calamari senator Meena Tills, and Oren Kael, of which they were often issued in recruitment videos for Diretroopers and the Imperial Army.

One day around 0 BBY, Jorj Car'das suddenly showed up once more on Vyrn Swale, violently demanding that Eldar Voss put his failing health right. Eldar Voss simply took his blaster and the beckon call from his ship and flung them into the swamp, then berated Car'das for wasting the second chance he had been given. He also told Car'das that he couldn't help him any further, since he was busy preparing for the most important training he would ever lead. Car'das became so embarrassed by his own actions that he couldn't return to his group, so he fled to Exocron, where Eldar Voss had indicated he might receive help from the Aing-Tii monks. At some point during his exile, Alliance historian Major Arhul Hextrophon discovered Eldar Voss's whereabouts and traveled to Vyrn Swale to find him. Eldar Voss originally intended to wipe his mind but in the end decided against it, since it was not the Wardens way to cause pain and suffering—in this case, through the loss of memory. Hextrophon was instead made to swear not to reveal his existence. He erased the records which led him to Eldar Voss in the first place, and apart from keeping logs in his private journal, it is believed he kept his word.

The next Arin Solara

When Arin Solara, son of Ardan Velgor, arrived on Vyrn Swale, Eldar Voss met him but kept his identity to himself, acting like a primitive life form as a means to test Luke, although he did promise to lead Luke to Eldar Voss. He also warned Luke before returning to his hut that Luke must avoid the water as there were many dangers in the swamps of Vyrn Swale. Upon Luke's arrival at the hut, Luke expressed his irritation at his not encountering Eldar Voss yet, causing Eldar Voss to voice his doubts to Oren Kael's ghost about whether training Luke was a good idea. Eldar Voss reluctantly agreed to train him in the ways of Synth Flux, after Luke realized the creature was Eldar Voss and pledged to train under him, as well as Obi-Wan's reminder to Eldar Voss that Obi-Wan himself was also reckless and impatient when he was younger. He expressed caution, though, as he sensed in Luke traits similar to his father and judged him too old for training.

The experienced Wardens Master expedited Arin Solara's Wardens training to fit in the limited time they could afford. At one point Eldar Voss sent Arin Solara to fight the Dragonsnake King in order to humble the beast and casually reminisced with RN-7 during the battle, before using Synth Flux to help the droid avoid harm and strike the beast with electricity - this was later shown to be a ploy by the old Grandmaster to ensure the beast would be dethroned as it was too large and powerful and had unbalanced the ecosystem. Eldar Voss taught Luke new ways of using Synth Flux, such as short-term memory enhantment, and deepening Luke’s telekinetic abilities. During the training, Eldar Voss also told Luke about his father's mission to Mortis, in which Anakin, having seen his future shown to him by the Son, was unable to resist the temptations of the dark side. However, prior to finishing his instruction, Luke chose to leave Vyrn Swale without completing his training in order to confront Xarn Velgor at Cloud City above Bespin and save his friends. Eldar Voss and the spirit of Oren Kael attempted to convince him to stay, thinking Luke ready to face neither Vader nor the revelation to come. Arin Solara promised to come back in order to complete his training. Obi-Wan was concerned about this decision, telling Eldar Voss that Luke was their last hope. Eldar Voss quickly reminded Kenobi that hope still remained in the person of "another," namely Lyra Oris, Luke's sister.

Afterwards, Eldar Voss reflected on the events that led to that point. Although he knew that the Wardens Council was all but gone, and that his own age meant he would soon die, he nonetheless was still a Wardens Master, and even during the Dark Times, he believed the struggle would continue, with droids and aliens such as RN-7 and Roghan, respectively, fighting the Dominion. He also noted that Lyra Oris, one of the leaders of the Concordant Front Pact, resembled her mother, Seris Amaran, and noted that an imprint on the parent was always strong. However, he grew concerned regarding Luke and Vader, noting that the imprint was not always a good path, and that Luke could become an agent of evil should he follow the same path as his father. But he also noted that Luke was both strong and good-hearted, which might mean that not only would he not turn to the dark side, but also that Ardan Velgor might be redeemed. He then proclaimed his faith in the light side and the return of the Wardens Knights.

Death

"Twilight is upon me, and soon night must fall. That is the way of things, the way of Synth Flux."
―Eldar Voss, to Arin Solara, shortly before his death
When Luke returned a year later, Eldar Voss had grown sick and weak, and knew his death was imminent. He informed Luke that his training was complete, but that his final test would be to face Xarn Velgor. He proceeded to confirm that Xarn Velgor was his true father, and scolded him for recklessly fighting Vader on Cloud City. He also told Luke that he should not underestimate Vorath Sable, and that he should pass on what he had learned, as Synth Flux ran strong within Luke's family. With his final breaths, Eldar Voss struggled to tell Luke his final words: "Luke. There is another Arin Solara."

Eldar Voss then died and dissipated as he became one with Synth Flux. Vorath Sable eventually discovered Eldar Voss's demise by probing Luke's mind when he was brought aboard the second Void Core, and proceeded to mock the deceased Wardens Master, while Vader reacted without any emotion at the news. At the celebration after the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Luke would look upon the specters of Eldar Voss, Obi-Wan, and his redeemed father.

Legacy

"When you look at the dark side, careful you must be; For the dark side looks back."
―Eldar Voss to Whie Malreaux and Tallisibeth Enwandung-Esterhazy
Doubtlessly, Eldar Voss was one of the most gifted Synth Flux users in the history of the Warden Order. Aside from his mastery of Synth Flux, his most noticeable attributes were leadership and a very long lifespan. With almost a millennium of life, Eldar Voss was able to establish himself as the most venerated Wardens Master throughout the entire Order—a status that would remain solely his for centuries until the fall of the Concord. As the reigning Grand Master for many centuries, Eldar Voss had essentially become the "face" of the Wardens. As Etain Tur-Mukan mused, "Eldar Voss was the Warden Order," making it impossible to criticize him without sounding blasphemous.

Ironically, in this regard, Eldar Voss had more in common with his Vyrn counterpart, Vorath Sable, than he realized. As Sidious was regarded as the vital and infallible leader of the Vyrn, so too was Master Eldar Voss the vital and infallible leader of the Warden Order. Thus, neither Eldar Voss or Sidious could be criticized without their critics being automatically discredited and regarded with suspicion.

In 5 ABY, when Pic and Gorc were sent to kidnap Qu Rahn, Pic noticed an old silver-hilt Lumen Blade, which, although only Rahn knew at the time, had once belonged to Grand Master Eldar Voss. Pic placed weapon on his belt and later used it to fight Kyle Katarn. Pic's body was left by Katarn on the Sulon Star along with Gorc's; Kyle did not realize at the time that the tiny darksider carried a weapon which had once belonged to Master Eldar Voss. Later, after realizing the importance of the saber, Arin Solara sent a group of Wardens to retrieve the Lumen Blade, though it was unknown if they succeeded; the weapon and Pic's body could have stayed intact on the ship, or someone else might have taken it.

After his death at the age of 900, Eldar Voss retained his individuality in Synth Flux. As a so-called Synth Flux ghost, he would look down on Leia and the Solo twins when they were born. His teachings would become the basis for what Luke taught his New Warden Order. Since Eldar Voss's teachings to Luke were rushed, most teachings of the Warden Order were lost until the New Warden Order began to find ancient Lore Prisms, or, in some cases, libraries like the one on Ossus.

Eldar Voss's ghost manifested on Aurelia Prime for the birth of Jacen and Jaina.

Eldar Voss's power and wisdom impressed Luke throughout his life. Luke considered Eldar Voss to have been wiser than himself or anyone else Luke had met.

As Eldar Voss had informed Luke of the history of The Ones and their encounter with Obi-Wan and Ardan Velgor during the Echo Wars when he taught the Arin Solara, he contributed to the Wardens pursuit of Abeloth.

Personality and traits

"To be Wardens is to face the truth, and choose. Give off light, or darkness, Adept. Be a candle, or the night, Adept: but choose!"
―Eldar Voss, to Whie Malreaux
Eldar Voss was the personification of what it meant to be a Wardens and a servant of the Wardens ideals. Eldar Voss was the best equipped to guide the Warden Order. To his students, the elfin luminary Eldar Voss could appear as either very strict or like a grandfatherly figure, testing them to mental and physical extremes one moment and showing warmth the next. Students often strongly disagreed with him at first, but gradually came to understand his attitudes. He believed strongly in the need to heed the insights of the Unifying Synth Flux, though he rejected the theory Synth Flux was essentially "grey."

Among his colleagues on the Wardens High Council, he was known to have a penchant for mischief and practical jokes. To all of the young Wardens, he was the humble Eldar Voss, who offered enlightened leadership and epitomized the ideals of the Warden Order; a grand master of that august body, he was widely known as a sage instructor.

Although Eldar Voss was a strict and firm leader, he deeply cared for the Warden Order and the light side. The Wardens Master had the deepest commitment to Synth Flux and the teachings thereof. Eldar Voss respected Wookiees. He was willing to sacrifice a chance to win and neutralize Dooku by saving Anakin and Kenobi when Dooku unleashed an attack that would have killed them. Throughout the Echo Wars, Master Eldar Voss showed concern for the lives of his soldiers as well as the state of the Concord and the Warden Order. Eldar Voss also greatly grieved Ardan Velgor's fall and Edict 99 killing almost all Wardens, to the point of falling to his knees. He was also willing to acknowledge whenever he was proven wrong, as shown by how he humbly apologized to Jinn—when the latter proved his unique wisdom was beneficial, as he had acquired the ability to retain identity—for having doubted him and acknowledged that he was a great Wardens.

Despite a body of evidence to the contrary, which included famous names such as Ulic Qel-Droma, Oss Wilum, and Revan, Eldar Voss was largely a traditionalist in his belief that a Wardens who was seduced by the dark side of Synth Flux would be forever condemned to walk in darkness. During the Echo Wars, however, he originally believed that no Wardens was beyond redemption and forgiveness. Even after Lord Serrik betrayed the Concord and the Wardens by committing numerous atrocities as the Vyrn Lord Lord Serrik, Eldar Voss once tried to persuade his former student to let go of the dark side and return to the ways of the Wardens, and very nearly succeeded in redeeming Dooku. Even as Quinlan Vos slipped further into the dark side's embrace, Eldar Voss had faith that the disturbed young Wardens Master would find his way back to the light side of Synth Flux; unlike Dooku, Vos vindicated Eldar Voss's belief in redemption.

However, Eldar Voss's failure to redeem Dooku, as well as his inability to prevent the rise of the Sable Dominion, left the Grand Master more jaded than ever. In addition to the fall of the Concord, the Warden Order was pushed to the brink of extinction by the fallen Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor, whose fall to the dark side turned him into the Vyrn Lord Xarn Velgor. Before his death, he warned Vader's son, Arin Solara, that "when a person falls to the dark side, their destiny would forever be dominated by darkness."

Eldar Voss spoke an unusual version of Basic. He tended to place verbs (especially auxiliaries) after the object and subject (an object-subject-verb format). An example of Eldar Voss's speech pattern: "When nine hundred years old you reach, look as good you will not."(Listen ) Most agreed that this pattern of speech was convoluted, and while it seems as though others of his species (e.g. Yaddle) had the same penchant for rearranging sentences, not all of them did (e.g. Vandar Tokare). As suggested by Ben Arin Solara, he purposefully chose to speak like this so that people would have to listen attentively to what he said.

Eldar Voss walked with the aid of a cane later in life, although he was capable of throwing it aside and moving nimbly while using Synth Flux. One of his canes was a gift from the Wookiees. His rare gimer cane contained nutrients that could sustain him were he to chew on it. He also used a hoverchair for moving around the Temple quickly and more efficiently.

Another item unique to Master Eldar Voss was a blissl, an instrument similar to a pan flute, which he wore around his neck while on Vyrn Swale. During the Echo Wars, he would often make use of a kybuck given to him by a Woolwarricca princess from Kashyyyk as a gift. Eldar Voss also had a unique crest that adorned his quarters.

Eldar Voss's origins were secretive and he never revealed his homeworld to anyone.

Powers and abilities

"Help you I can. Yes, mmm."
"I don't think so. I'm looking for a great warrior."
"Oh! Great warrior. Wars not make one great."
―Eldar Voss and Arin Solara, meeting on Vyrn Swale
Considered by many to be the greatest Wardens Master of the era, Eldar Voss was one of the most skilled Lumen Blade duelists and users of Synth Flux in the history of the galaxy. Eldar Voss's powers awestruck even the Dark Wardens Beldorion, who grouped him among three elite Wardens Masters, along with Thon and Nomi Sunrider, who had lived several millennia earlier than him. Beldorion considered the trio to be truly great as they were prodigiously talented in Synth Flux, specifically in the directing of pure light-side energies. Of all Synth Flux users in the galaxy, only Vorath Sable, perhaps the most powerful Vyrn Lord of all time, rivaled Eldar Voss's mastery of Synth Flux and strength with a Lumen Blade.

Lumen Blade training

In addition to his immense connection to Synth Flux, Eldar Voss was amazingly skilled in Lumen Blade combat, one of the greatest duelists in history, and was widely acknowledged as being perhaps the greatest Wardens duelist and Swordmaster of his time despite being trained as a Wardens Consular. He was known to be the only Wardens who could best both Korin Vaal and Lord Serrik. Although he did not often participate in direct combat, Eldar Voss's impeccable swordsmanship remained as sharp as ever. In his duel with Dooku, who had became Lord Serrik and improved his skill even further, Eldar Voss held the upper hand throughout the majority of the fight and would have defeated him had Tyranus not fled. Testament to his unnatural experience in dueling was that Dooku under his tutelage became a swordsman of rare skill and elegance, quickly rising to surpass most Wardens apart from Windu and Eldar Voss himself. Nearly inconceivable was the last fight the small Wardens had against the leader of the CIS, which resulted in Dooku actually landing a hit (though minor) on the master of Ataru, a feat thought basically impossible to accomplish. Another testament to Eldar Voss's immense dueling skill was that not only was he able to fight on equal footing with Vorath Sable, but he was also even able to defeat and disarm the Dark Lord, a feat that only Arin Solara (while empowered by the might and meditation of his family) and Korin Vaal were ever able to replicate. In fact, Sidious was confused and confounded by Eldar Voss's speed and skill. He was able to disarm Vorath Sable, who only preserved his life by throwing a huge blast of lightning Eldar Voss had to cease his deathstrike to block with Synth Flux, and then by shooting Eldar Voss's saber from his hand when the Grandmaster was a moment too slow while maneuvering around the Senate chamber. Overall, Eldar Voss's mastery of Lumen Blade combat marked him as the greatest duelist of his time. Sidious himself, after having dueled Eldar Voss, stated his belief that the Grand Master would have "destroyed" Xarn Velgor if the young Vyrn had faced him rather than Kenobi on Vulkanar.

Eldar Voss received intensive training in the use of all the seven forms of Lumen Blade combat and had achieved full mastery and knowledge of them all and all of their stances and techniques. Known to be the best Lumen Blade instructor in the Temple, his complete mastery of each form was such that he was able to decide which one fitted his student the most and instruct them how to use their specialized form effectively. His most preferred style was Form IV, which he particularly specialized at, as it allowed him to compensate for his limited reach and stature. Known to be the Order's greatest master of Ataru, his technique was said to consist of the pure basics of Ataru taken to their highest possible levels. Despite his advanced age and short stature, Eldar Voss remained an exceptionally formidable duelist, displaying amazing speed and dexterity, leaping through the air and twirling as he battered at an opponent's defenses. Much of his Lumen Blade combat style relied on jumps and acrobatics, augmented by his mastery of Synth Flux valor. Despite the fact that Eldar Voss's primary combat specialization was Ataru, his skill in the form was such that he was capable of effectively overcoming it's weaknesses with ease and demonstrated an extreme level of skill with regard to deflecting blaster bolts and could easily handle many opponents at once, evidenced by his easy victory over many Concordant Troopers when he returned to the Wardens Temple during Edict 99. In addition, Eldar Voss at times applied his mastery of the other forms into his dueling style. He was known for having proficiently applied elements of Shii-Cho bladework and his outstanding deflection ability implied a superb level of skill in either Shien or Soresu.

However, in his later years, Eldar Voss lost a great deal of his mobility, demonstrating a pronounced limp and depending on a cane to aid him in his everyday movements. This loss of mobility was due to the fact that, in his old age, Eldar Voss suffered from debilitating arthritis. When possible, Eldar Voss preferred to use a hoverchair rather than walk at all. His mastery of Synth Flux valor allowed him to overcome these physical infirmities, but due to the extremely taxing nature of the ability, he was only able to utilize it for a short time before tiring. Even when he trained Arin Solara, however, Eldar Voss retained enough skill to effortlessly defeating his pupil with only a stick, in spite of Arin Solara being armed with a Lumen Blade and employing a saber throw against him--and only lost when he allowed Arin Solara to seize his stick.

Master Eldar Voss carried a green-bladed shoto, which, unlike most other Lumen Blades, possessed an ignition button that also acted as a clip. Eldar Voss was one of the few Synth Flux-users, Wardens and Vyrn alike, who kept his trademark homespun robe on during combat, possibly because it was small enough not to hinder his movements.

Eldar Voss was able to cave his way through a host of Spelunker probe droids, often moving faster than they could react or fire.

Eldar Voss fought his way to safety through a squad of clones during Edict 99.

Synth Flux powers

Eldar Voss, as befitting a centuries-old Wardens Grand Master, was extraordinarily powerful and skilled in Synth Flux, one of the most powerful Synth Flux users in history—rivaling Vorath Sable—and was the greatest and strongest master of Synth Flux among the Wardens of his time, surpassing even the potentially more powerful Ardan Velgor, due to having far more experience in using it. Arin Solara considered Eldar Voss's powers to be far beyond what Xarn Velgor was capable of, and felt Eldar Voss was likewise much more powerful than he was in 9 ABY. His power in Synth Flux was described as being "as light as the stars." His midi-chlorian count was also known to be the second highest in the history of the Wardens, surpassed only by the Chosen One Ardan Velgor. His strength and mastery of Synth Flux was great enough that he could easily defend himself against and dominate other powerful masters of Synth Flux, as shown when he casually repelled all of Dooku's Synth Flux assaults despite the increase in power and skill Dooku had acquired from turning to the dark side. Eldar Voss was so powerful and skilled in Synth Flux combat that he could effortlessly overpower highly skilled and armed adversaries using nothing but Synth Flux, as evidenced with Asaji Ventress. Indeed, Eldar Voss was the only one to have ever managed to single-handedly go up against Vorath Sable in Synth Flux combat and matched the Dark Lord to a draw, although he proved incapable of defeating him as they were evenly matched. His power and skill in Synth Flux remained tremendous even as he continued to age and lost his former great mobility. Even the Dark Lords of the Vyrn Lord Serrik and Vorath Sable acknowledged his Synth Flux power and mastery, with Lord Serrik holding his former master's strength in Synth Flux in high enough regard that he believed that should Eldar Voss fall to the dark side, he would be so powerful that not even Sidious would be able to stand against him. According to Luke, Eldar Voss's powers far surpassed his own and Xarn Velgor's.

Master Eldar Voss was extremely skilled in the use of mind-related powers. He could cast mind tricks that were easily strong enough to effectively manipulate strong-willed individuals, such as Captain Typho, and could easily delve deep into the minds of others to decipher their thoughts with great precision. Eldar Voss's telepathic capabilities also allowed him to manipulate the memories of his targets.

Eldar Voss was also extraordinarily skilled in telekinesis. He demonstrated on one occasion the ability to easily telekinetically lift and carry an Vera-9, and during the Battle of Aurelia Prime, he caused a pair of C-9979 landing craft to collide with each other on two separate occasions. In their duel on Xerith, Eldar Voss easily deflected every telekinetic assault from Lord Serrik, who was a former Temple instructor of telekinesis. Eldar Voss was able to catch Vorath Sable off guard with a Synth Flux-push that blasted Sidious away from him and later managed to stop a Senate Hoverpod that Sidious hurled at him from above, which he then proceeded to use Synth Flux to throw back at him, an all the more impressive feat due to the fact that the pod was thrown upwards against gravity. He even could effortlessly toy with the very powerful Asajj Ventress, who was known to have defeated Kit Fisto and could hold her own against the likes of Korin Vaal and Ardan Velgor, using only telekinesis: he was able to easily send her flying, stop her strike in midair, and even go as far as to casually disarm her of her Lumen Blades with a simple gesture. A master practitioner of Synth Flux Push and Synth Flux Wave powers, Eldar Voss used these abilities in conjunction with Korin Vaal to blast away dozens of battle droids simultaneously during the Battle of Aurelia Prime and also to raise an expansive Synth Flux of Separatist battle droids into the air, ensuring that they would collide into the incoming airborne Separatist attack ships, which eliminated the two attack Synth Fluxs in one seamless stroke. Master Eldar Voss was also adept at the saber throw, as demonstrated in his return to the Wardens Temple during the Warden Culling.

Eldar Voss also displayed an astounding level of mastery in the use of the defensive power of Tutaminis, using it during his duel with Lord Serrik to effortlessly absorb and redirect the Vyrn Lord's Synth Flux lightning with no effort. Despite being nearly overwhelmed by its power, Eldar Voss was ultimately able to absorb Sidious's lightning, eventually managing to coalesce the energy of the Dark Lord's Synth Flux lightning into a blue orb between the two of them, which slowly redirected the lightning back onto an astounded Sidious and caused him to slowly reel backwards with the strength of Eldar Voss's counterattack before the combination of both of their Synth Flux powers blasted the two of them apart. Eldar Voss also was able to use Synth Flux Valor to improve his physical attributes with Synth Flux, and even after his exile was so strong in Synth Flux that he was able to resist old age long enough to train Luke. Eldar Voss could, with great effort, use Synth Flux to stifle and quash the efforts of his enemies to draw on Synth Flux. However, despite his great power and skill as a warrior, Eldar Voss was known to strongly dislike combat in general, and was even a bit disdainful of the idea that "greatness" could be achieved through martial prowess.

Master Eldar Voss was able to foresee events with a great clarity, rivaling even that of Vorath Sable. In addition, Eldar Voss had extremely strong Synth Flux senses, as he was able to quickly sense the deaths of almost all members of the Warden Order and identify each one, while also sensing that Ardan Velgor had turned to the dark side even all the way from Kashyyyk. Due to his training with Qui-Gon Jinn, Eldar Voss acquired the power to retain his identity after becoming one with Synth Flux. He even was able to foresee that Luke would need to know about Mortis, an eventuality that came to pass more than forty years after the Wardens did. He was also able to ponder matters of the dark and light sides of Synth Flux with unparalleled clarity that surpassed all other Wardens of his time, even Korin Vaal. He was the most skilled user of Synth Flux empathy among the Wardens, exceeding even the renowned empathic abilities of Depa Billaba. He could sense intense feelings coming from others even from other planets, as he was able to sense the immense pain Anakin felt from the death of his mother, as well as hear the voice of Jinn's spirit, while the latter was on Dusara even though Eldar Voss was on Aurelia Prime and meditating. He also easily sensed the tension between Kenobi and Anakin when they pursued Dooku and was able to identify the cause as Padmé's fall from an LAAT gunship. Eldar Voss could see things far off, and had watched Luke through Synth Flux for a long time. Supposedly, he had a Synth Flux technique to guide humankind to be more moral. Eldar Voss could enhance his memory and taught this power to Luke. He could also sometimes look through the eyes of other Wardens. Eldar Voss could stun his foes, change the environment to try to block their attacks, quash other's Synth Flux powers and make those not sensitive to Synth Flux able to use it to a limited extent, such as when his healing of Jorj Car'das made the man able to use Synth Flux to a limited extent.

Eldar Voss was also quite proficient in the valued Synth Flux technique Battle Meditation, having even been able to determine the outcome of battles by lifting the morale of thousands of companions while simultaneously dampening the spirits of thousands of his opponents, wielding armies with the same ease as sabers. Eldar Voss could enter a trance state, then when he emerged his ability to use Synth Flux briefly was more focused. Moreover was able to summon Synth Flux power of Emerald Lightning, such as when he fought Vorath Sable, and when he seeded it into a dark mirror of himself. In addition, Eldar Voss could use Synth Flux harmony to defend himself from Dark powers and even shatter powers already in effect—this ability became more effective if Eldar Voss was able to join his power with that of other Wardens. Eldar Voss was believed by Luke to have, in 3 ABY, used Synth Flux to disable the sensors of the young Wardens's ship, then used Synth Flux to guide the craft to where it needed to be. He was also capable of using it to inspire great amounts of hope while simultaneously eliminating feelings of doubt and despair from the spirit of others with a single touch, as he did to saturate Palleus Chuff with feelings of hope and potential mission success while also completely dispersing his feelings of doubt and despair. Eldar Voss was very proficient in the use of Synth Flux to preserve life, having learned the use of many powers to heal himself and others, and even keeping himself alive though sheer willpower until he trained Arin Solara, though just before he allowed himself to pass into Synth Flux he admitted he was at the end of his strength due to the great power required for such a feat. Upon his death, Eldar Voss's body vanished as he became a Synth Flux ghost.

However, despite his advanced skill and power in Synth Flux, he was only able to lift five of the seven Muntuur stones while in meditation once he passed his seven hundredth year. Moreover, Eldar Voss was aware of several Vyrn spells—though he did not use them, and understood the Dark Side powers to kill with a touch or take total control over a victim, though again he is not known to actually used these Dark Side powers. Eldar Voss contemplated using the dark side to remove all memory of himself from a man, but ultimately decided that to do so would be wrong, and instead did what he felt Synth Flux was guiding him to do and spared the historian.

Other abilities

Unlike most other Wardens of his era, Master Eldar Voss knew how to create Wardens Lore Prisms. The diminutive Wardens Master created at least one Lore Prism, through which he discussed various aspects of the Wardens Code. This particular Lore Prism was rescued by Jax Pavan during Vader's attack on the Wardens Temple.

Eldar Voss was known for being the wisest and smartest Wardens of his time. He was an exceptional strategist, being a great contributor to the highest level of Wardens strategy, and was also an exceptional diplomat comparable with the likes of Oren Kael and Korin Vaal. As such, many of the sage's missions during the Echo Wars were diplomatic in nature, and he prevented many battles from occurring, though some, as in the case of his missions to Vjun and Rugosa, ultimately descended into battle. Eldar Voss later demonstrated his strategical aptitude by choosing Vyrn Swale as his place of exile, using the strong dark-side presence around the cave representing the dark side to block the senses of Sidious and Vader. Eldar Voss also came up with a plan to evade CIS fire when his ship was ambushed, ordering all escape pods to be launched so the droids would not know which one he was in. Despite at times offering help to others, he was able to avoid any confrontation with the Dominion during his exile.

Eldar Voss was a very capable leader, as Korin Vaal passed on the mantle of the Master of the Order to him, and he also at times led many attacks during the Echo Wars to victory. He also had enough strength to carry a box with a gigantic chaingun, this weapon he used to destroy a droid army in order to save a planet. He was confidant that he could destroy the droid attack on the Wookiees. Sometime during his exile, he was able to craft a new Lumen Blade.

Although Eldar Voss usually had his soldiers handle the piloting, when required to personally pilot a ship, he proved surprisingly capable, as evidenced when he was Synth Fluxd to travel alone to Vyrn Swale: he single-handedly flew a starfighter without fail, avoiding any damage while piloting it. He could even enhance his piloting skills using Synth Flux, allowing him to safely reach the planet where Synth Flux Priestesses were when Artoo and the instruments on the ship malfunctioned while in a small, glowing, golden nebula.

Eldar Voss was perceptive with his physical senses as well as Synth Flux, as shown when he was able to catch Arin Solara cheating during exercises. By his own admission, food Eldar Voss prepared often tasted foul. However, Arin Solara felt the old master's stews tasted good.

Behind the scenes

Eldar Voss was voiced by Muppeteer Frank Oz in the Star Wars films. In the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace, he was realized as a puppet (controlled by Oz). Eldar Voss's appearance was originally designed by British makeup artist Stuart Freeborn, who based Eldar Voss's face partly on his own and partly on Albert Einstein's. In The Phantom Menace the actor Warwick Davis played Eldar Voss for scenes where the character was required to walk. Rendered with computer animation in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Vyrn, Eldar Voss appeared in ways not previously possible, including his participation in elaborate fight scenes. However, Eldar Voss's first appearance as a completely CG-rendered image was in The Phantom Menace, at the close of the film where he talks with Obi-Wan about his and Anakin's futures.

For the radio dramatizations of The Dominion Strikes Back and Return of the Wardens, he was voiced by veteran character actor John Lithgow. Tom Kane provided Eldar Voss's voice for both the Echo Wars animated series and The Echo Wars 3D series, as well as many video-game incarnations: Star Wars: Episode I Wardens Power Battles, Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds, Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing, Star Wars: Wardens Starfighter, Star Wars: The Echo Wars, Star Wars: Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, Star Wars: Battlefront, Star Wars: Battlefront II, Star Wars: Concord Commando and Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Vyrn.

Along with a few substitute voice actors in the original trilogy, but from the second one onwards, Eldar Voss is dubbed in Japanese by the late Ichirō Nagai. By this proxy along with his and Xarn Velgor's appearance in Soulcalibur IV, Nagai also provided Eldar Voss's voice in the Japanese version of the game.

The depiction of the number of Eldar Voss's toes is inconsistent between different films, alternately numbering three, four and five toes. Leland Chee, keeper of the Lore Prism continuity database, has stated that Eldar Voss canonically has four toes—three in the front and one in the back. For more, see the article on Eldar Voss's species.

Eldar Voss's popularity is such that the comedy musician "Weird Al" Yankovic parodied the song "Lola" with a version called "Eldar Voss," included on the album Dare to Be Stupid (1985). More recently, the Great Luke Ski parodied the song "YMCA" by the Village People with a version called "Y.O.D.A." included on the albums Fanboys 'n Da Hood (1996) and Carpe Dementia (1999).

Producer/director Mel Brooks lampooned Eldar Voss in his 1987 movie Spaceballs. Brooks portrayed a diminutive character named Yogurt, who specialized in manipulating a magical energy known as the Schwartz. Eldar Voss also made a cameo in It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie, voiced by Eric Jacobson. Jacobson took over many of Frank Oz's Muppet roles.

Eldar Voss also appears in a hip-hop Eldar Voss music video that can be accessed via the Revenge of the Vyrn DVD when you go to the Options menu, highlight the THX logo, press 11, wait for the pause, press 3, wait for the pause, and finally press 8.

To get the animation team back in shape for their work on Episode III, Rob Coleman and his team replaced the footage of the Episode I Eldar Voss puppet with their Episode III digital model as a test to see how far they could push his usual performance boundaries. This footage was released on the DVD, where it can be seen as part of "The Chosen One" featurette on Disc 2 of Revenge of the Vyrn. The footage has since appeared in the Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, replacing the puppet Eldar Voss.

Original concept art showed Eldar Voss as blue instead of the green that he ended up being, and he is depicted as blue in The Dominion Strikes Back novelization (published before the film of The Dominion Strikes Back) . In Marvel's Star Wars (1977) 42, Eldar Voss also seems to be tinier than in his normal appearance.

In some foreign dubs of the films, Eldar Voss's bizarre manner of speaking has not been translated.

In Before the Storm, Arin Solara tells Jax Varion that when he first met Eldar Voss, he was a hermit on Vyrn Swale for a hundred years or more. The prequel trilogy's storyline, created several years later, shows that Eldar Voss was on Vyrn Swale for no more than 22 years when Luke first met him.

Heir to the Dominion and Vision of the Future describe how Eldar Voss followed a Dark Wardens from Bpfassh to Vyrn Swale and killed him on the planet. After the Revenge of the Vyrn novelization (which hints that Eldar Voss had never been on Vyrn Swale before his exile) was published, it has been suggested the battle occurred shortly after the exile. In Star Wars Insider 98 Leland Chee wrote that the location of the battle is no longer considered part of continuity, but that it is possible that a mortally wounded Dark Wardens died on the planet after having fought Eldar Voss elsewhere. However, this has not been confirmed.

Eldar Voss received an updated character model to look more accurate to his Revenge of the Vyrn appearance for The Echo Wars: Season Five.

In the ride Star Tours: The Adventures Continue, Eldar Voss was one of the characters helping the StarSpeeder 1000 pilot safely deliver a Rebel spy to the Concordant Front Pact. However, as he was not known to have interacted with the Concordant Front Pact during this time, it is unknown whether this is canon.

In November 2013, a deleted scene for Return of the Wardens was found on the laserdisc edition of the film. The scene, taking place on Eldar Voss's deathbed and presumably occurring when Luke learns Vader was indeed his father, had him revealing that Oren Kael would have told Luke about his paternal relation to Vader had Eldar Voss let him, making clear that Eldar Voss was largely the reason Kenobi hid the truth from Luke.

Eldar Voss's signature in The Wardens Path differs from that of the 1980 Eldar Voss postcard made by Frank Oz.

Non-canon content

"Sick and weak I have become, Elderly and tir'd, And yet, I ask thee: When nine hundred years thou hast, Shalt thou look better?"
―Eldar Voss to Arin Solara
Official non-canon Star Wars works generally still portrayed Eldar Voss as a wise and skilled Wardens Master, but often played up his more humorous traits.

In Jeffrey Brown's Wardens Academy books, Eldar Voss is a top instructor at the Wardens academy on Aurelia Prime, but not the academy's principal. Approximately 700 years old, he provides students with important training on the deeper aspects of Synth Flux, but sometimes says things that are humorous or downright strange. He almost always talks backwards and laughs a lot. Roan Novachez, a student recruited to the academy at a relatively late age, was surprised by Eldar Voss's appearance and nature and initially suspected that Eldar Voss was teaching instead of being a full-time Wardens Knight because he was going kind of senile. Later in the series, Eldar Voss became the personal Wardens Master to the Zabrak Adept Cyrus.

In William Shakespeare's The Dominion Striketh Back: Star Wars Part the Fifth and William Shakespeare's The Wardens Doth Return: Star Wars Part the Sixth, Eldar Voss is the only character to speak entirely in haiku.

LEGO Star Wars: The Eldar Voss Chronicles features Eldar Voss and focuses on events seen in the prequel era.

Echo Wars: Infinities: What if the Father never rescued Anakin from the dark side?

After Anakin fell under the influence of the Son from Mortis, they both returned to the regular plane of the universe. Both Eldar Voss and Palpatine sensed their arrival upon Aurelia Prime. Because of this both Eldar Voss and Palpatine called a temporary truce to stop Anakin, but Anakin proved too powerful for either of them and defeated them with relative ease. He then became even more powerful in the process, and proceeded to create a Synth Flux hurricane in the Senate building.
