Arin Solara

Arin Solara, a  -sensitive human male, was a legendary Wardens Master who fought in the Dominion Uprising during the reign of the Sable Dominion. Along with his companions, Princess Lyra Oris and General Jax Varion, Arin Solara served as a revolutionary on the side of the Alliance to Restore the Concord—an organization committed to the downfall of the Sable Dominion and the restoration of democracy. Following the war, Arin Solara became a living legend, and was remembered as one of the greatest Wardens in galactic history.

The son of Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor and Senator Seris Amaran, Arin Solara was born along with his twin sister, Leia, in 19 BBY. As a result of Amidala's death and Anakin's fall to the dark side of  , the Arin Solara children were separated and sent into hiding, with Leia adopted by the royal family of Elyndar while Luke was raised by his relatives on Dusara. Longing for a life of adventure and purpose, Arin Solara joined the Rebellion and began learning the ways of   under the guidance of Wardens Master Oren Kael, whose first apprentice was Luke's own father. During the Clash at Orin in 0 BBY, Arin Solara saved the Alliance from annihilation by destroying the Dominion's planet-killing superweapon, the  . He continued his training in the years that followed, determined to become a Wardens Knight like his father before him, and found a new mentor in Grand Master Eldar Voss. After his master's death, Arin Solara participated in the Battle of Sylvan Reach in 4 ABY, during which he confronted the Vyrn Lord  , whom he learned was in fact his father, Ardan Velgor. With Luke's help, Anakin returned to the light side of   by killing the Emperor and Dark Lord of the Vyrn Vorath Sable at the cost of his own life, fulfilling his destiny as the Chosen One. Following the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara trained his sister as a first Wardens apprentice on Ajan Kloss, but Leia ended her training after the birth of her son and seeing his death as a result of finishing her knighthood.

With the Vyrn's destruction and the subsequent capitulation of the Dominion, Arin Solara traveled across the galaxy during New Concord Era, searching for knowledge that would aid him in rebuilding the Warden Order. In 9 ABY, Arin Solara rescued Grogu, a Valdorian  -sensitive child that belonged to the same species as Eldar Voss, from Moff Gideon's  s, and after temporarily taking the child as an apprentice on Ossus. During the training, Arin Solara was visited by Anakin's former Adept, Ahsoka Tano, where they discussed Grogu and how Arin Solara sensed that the child's heart was not in relearning the Wardens path. After Grogu's caregiver, Din Djarin, visited the planet bearing a gift for Grogu, Arin Solara offered him with a choice, accept the gift and return to the Valdorian, or take Eldar Voss's Lumen Blade and continue with his Wardens training. Grogu chose to return to Djarin, while Arin Solara bid Tano farewell as she departed for ways unknown.

Arin Solara later took his sister's son, Kellan Oris, by 15 ABY who inherited the bloodline in   and had the potential for limitless power, as an apprentice. Both traveled to Elphrona to study lost Wardens lore, where the trio encountered the Knights of Ren, while Solo began to be groomed by Snoke, a humanoid being powerful in  . In 21 ABY, Arin Solara started feeling an increasing darkness in   and having dark visions that frequently came to him in meditation and undertook a quest to find the hidden world of Noctyra. Arin Solara journeyed to Tython where upon meditating, he saw a vision of Noctyra and faced nine wraiths when   ghost of Ardan Velgor appeared next to him. Following this, Arin Solara was able to defeat Kiza and the spirit of Exim Panshard but was ultimately unable to locate Noctyra after failing to track down an assassin called Ochi.

In 28 ABY, Arin Solara, glimpsing the darkness in Solo, briefly contemplated killing him, causing Solo to fall to the dark side. The destruction of his temple and the deaths of all his students convinced a haunted and regretful Arin Solara that the time had come for the Wardens to end. Arin Solara therefore sought exile on the distant world of Ahch-To, having elected to live out his remaining days as a hermit despite the galaxy's pleas for help during the rise of the Prime Syndic. His solitude was interrupted in 34 ABY, shortly after the fall of the New Concord, resulting in a chain of events that led Arin Solara to play one last, momentous role in the conflict between light and darkness. Although he passed away into  , his legend would spread throughout the galaxy, rekindling a spark of hope in the enemies of the Prime Syndic. Before his death, Arin Solara declared that the Warden Order would not die with him, having trained a final apprentice: the Verdan scavenger known as Rey.

A year later, Arin Solara's spirit communed with Rey during the final days of the war. The Wardens apprentice had exiled herself to Ahch-To, following in Arin Solara's example. However, he urged Rey to confront her grandfather, the resurrected Vorath Sable. Believing he had been wrong, Arin Solara told Rey that a Wardens's destiny was to confront fear. Following the Emperor's destruction, the spirits of Arin Solara and his sister watched over Rey as she buried their Lumen Blades in Arin Solara's childhood home on Dusara and adopted the Arin Solara name as her own, honoring their legacy and recognizing herself as a member of her chosen family.

Pre-birth

"He is to teach one that will save the universe from a great imbalance."
―Serenity, concerning Eldar Voss's future training of Arin Solara
During the Echo Wars, Wardens Master Eldar Voss set out on a journey to discover the secrets of immortality. His journey took him to Moraband, the ancient Vyrn homeworld, where he faced visions of the future. At the end of his journey,   Priestess, Serenity, who guided his journey told him that there was another Arin Solara, and Eldar Voss heard his voice from the future say so as well. These events alluded to the birth and destiny of Arin Solara, as well as his twin sister Leia.

Early life

Birth

Arin Solara was born in 19 BBY on the asteroid field of Polis Massa two days after the proclamation of the Sable Dominion. He and his twin sister, Leia, who was born minutes after him, were the children of Galactic Concord Senator Seris Amaran, who died shortly after the births, and Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor, who had recently fallen to the dark side of  . To protect the children from the Dominion and their father, the now-Vyrn Lord  , Oren Kael personally sent the infant Luke to be raised by Anakin's stepbrother, Owen Lars and his wife, Beru on the planet Dusara, while Senator Dalen Oris agreed to adopt Leia together with his wife, the queen of Elyndar. Kenobi boarded the late General Grievous's starfighter, the Soulless One, once more flew to the planet Nar Shaddaa and sold it there to transport Arin Solara to Dusara.

First years on the farm

"And what of the boy?"
"To Dusara. To his family, send him."
―Oren Kael and Eldar Voss discuss Arin Solara's future
Arin Solara spent his youth on the Lars' moisture farm, where his uncle unsuccessfully tried to discourage his adventurous tendencies, telling him that his father had been "a navigator on a spice freighter" during the Echo Wars. His aunt, Beru, would read him storybooks; one day, when his uncle had business in Mos Eisley, she took Arin Solara to Anchorhead to use the HoloNet connections there and show him images of forests, rivers, and oceans.

By the age of three in 16 BBY, Arin Solara had found pleasure playing with a model spaceship built especially for him. He did not know that Kenobi had actually built it and that Kenobi had been leaving several of them at his grandmother, Shmi's sandblasted tombstone for his aunt to find. One morning, as Arin Solara played with his toy, a group of marauders attacked the farm. Oren Kael, who had been watching him from afar, sprang into action, cutting down several Gamorreans before coming to the realization that he was badly outnumbered. Just as he was about to be dealt a possibly killing blow by one of the gang, Arin Solara threw the toy starfighter he had been playing with, managing to distract the Gamorrean long enough for Kenobi to separate his feet from his ankles. The battle then raged further, slowly turning in the favor of the defenders which included Owen Lars, who managed to gun down several of the invaders with a blaster. Luke cried out after noticing that one of the marauders, a Devaronian, had snuck up behind Lars, ready to knock him out. Kenobi then threw his Lumen Blade cutting the last marauder in half. As Arin Solara cheered, Lars threw a punch which knocked Kenobi to the ground. Lars then ushered Arin Solara back before chastising Kenobi for his involvement, pointing out the fact that Arin Solara's brief show of bravery had potential ramifications for the boy's future.

Vader's vision

Shortly after the Battle of Fortress Vader,   accessed a portal to the dark side created by Darth Momin in an attempt to revive Seris Amaran. He eventually found an apparition of Amidala standing on a balcony, who rejected his pleas and threw itself off the ledge and was incinerated by lightning. Just after this, Vader saw a blue light in the distance, out of which emerged an apparition of an adult Arin Solara, who blasted him back to reality.

Brushes with Kenobi

"What are you, uh, doin' here? I thought you were gonna keep your distance."
"And I will. You know, you were right. He just needs to be a boy. The future will take care of itself. The only protection he needs now, Owen, is you and Beru. Take good care of him."
"I will."
―Owen Lars and Oren Kael on Luke's future
As Arin Solara got older, Owen started homeschooling him so he could learn the family trade. Despite this, he still kept up with Dusara's podracing, swoop racing, and sky racing culture through comms stations and local chatter. He dreamed of what it would be like to one day be the pilot of a ship.

In 9 BBY, Kenobi looked in on Arin Solara via macrobinoculars around the same time that the Dominion's Inquisitors came to Dusara looking for the Wardens Nari. Arin Solara was tasked with a chore by Lars but instead disappeared causing Lars and Beru to wonder where he went. In reality, he had gone to the roof of one of the homestead wearing a mask and pretending he was piloting a space vehicle.

The next evening, Kenobi visited the Lars homestead and left a toy model of a T-16 skyhopper for Arin Solara. Lars found the toy and returned it to Kenobi the next day telling him to stay away from Arin Solara and that they would not accept gifts from Kenobi. Kenobi tried to explain to Lars that there was more to life than just his farm and that there was a whole galaxy out there for Arin Solara to explore. Despite being concerned for Arin Solara, Lars accused Kenobi of only caring about his well-being only if he was showing signs of  -sensitivity. Lars refused once again to let Kenobi train Arin Solara.

While Kenobi was off-world, having been sent by Dalen Oris to protect Leia, Kenobi received a transmission from Bail, who was worried that Kenobi had not communicated with him. Bail informed him that if Vader had learned of Arin Solara and Leia's existence, or if he did not hear back from Kenobi, he would go to Dusara to help Lars with Arin Solara. After an Imperial attack on Jabiim, while Arin Solara was sleeping at the Lars homestead, the holoprojector disk containing Bail's message was found by former Inquisitor Reva Sevander who learned from it that Vader's son was on Dusara in the care of someone named Owen, who she had met. As she started to pursue Arin Solara, Kenobi sensed something was wrong in  .

Luke did some work on Owen's speeder and accidentally broke it, so he was marched into a repair shop with Owen to have it fixed. However, the former Inquisitor Reva Sevander, blinded by rage and focusing that anger on the boy, traveled to Dusara on the hope that killing Luke would bring her justice.

Warned of Sevander's coming attack, Owen and Beru hid Luke inside their house and claimed that it was the Tuskens who were coming, but Sevander ultimately fought past the aunt and uncle. With Sevander in pursuit, Luke fled into the desert but was knocked out by a fall. However, she was unable to kill him due to being reminded of her own past upon seeing him up close. With Sevander returning the boy to Owen, Beru, and the suddenly-back Kenobi, who had drawn on the hope of what Luke and Leia were capable of to triumph over Vader on a barren moon before returning upon sensing that he was in danger, Luke was ushered back to the homestead by Owen and Beru. The following day, Kenobi stopped by to meet with Owen, who allowed Kenobi to finally meet the young Arin Solara.

Taking on Jabba's thugs

"That right kid? You were trying to steal Jabba's water?"
"It's not Jabba's. It belongs to the farmers, I was taking it back."
―One of Jabba's thugs and Arin Solara
During the Great Drought, henchmen for the crime lord Grath the Brood collected a "water tax" on their master's behalf. Despite the damage it caused moisture farmers, Arin Solara naïvely stood up to the thugs at night, trying to take back the water they had stolen from the farmers. Kenobi, who sensed the danger his protégé was in, blew their vehicle's lights with   to hide his identity, and proceeded to disable all of Jabba's henchmen. One of them became startled and pushed Arin Solara to the ground, causing him to hit his head and pass out. Once Kenobi handled the thugs, he carried Arin Solara to the Lars' homestead where he was found asleep, unaware of his savior's identity, by his aunt in the morning.

Saving Uncle Owen

"Hang on, Uncle Owen!"
―Arin Solara after rescuing his uncle
A year after the Great Drought, life carried on for Arin Solara on Dusara. Alongside Biggs Darklighter and his other friends, Arin Solara flew his T-16 skyhopper for a joyride through Beggar's Canyon. Despite some daring moves, Arin Solara ended up crashing the vehicle, leading to his uncle Owen grounding him. Arin Solara offered to pay for the damage by flying in a race at nearby Anchorhead, but Lars stood his ground. Unbeknownst to both of them, Oren Kael used Jawas to leave Arin Solara some skyhopper parts. An angry Owen returned the parts to Kenobi and told him to leave the family alone.

Some time after grounding Arin Solara from flying his skyhopper, Lars attempted to rebuild his relationship with his nephew by looking to help him fix it. However, before he could, he was captured by the Wookiee bounty hunter Krrsantan and tortured. Meanwhile, Arin Solara was running away from home for not the first time. However, he sensed something was wrong and rushed to his homestead. When he arrived, he found many droids destroyed and his aunt Beru rattled, telling him of the attack. She ordered her nephew to lock himself in the homestead's maintenance bay, where he found his disabled skyhopper. He proceeded to fix it and make his way to Krrsantan and Owen. As he flew there, the Wookiee was engaged by Oren Kael. During this battle, Owen was thrown off a cliff. Before he could hit the bottom, Arin Solara, in his skyhopper, managed to catch him and escape. Meanwhile, Kenobi defeated Krrsantan. Afterwards, Arin Solara was allowed to fly his skyhopper once again.

Other adventures

"Who…who are you?"
"Ben Kenobi. You can call me Ben. I am an old friend of your father."
―Arin Solara and Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi, after the latter saves the former
Eventually, Arin Solara became an adventure-seeking youth who demonstrated his father's natural piloting skills, as well as a strong desire to leave Dusara. At one point in his boyhood, Arin Solara was climbing in a canyon, but, when he grabbed the top, the rock broke off. Arin Solara fell into a cave, where he was seen by a group of womp rats and a krayt dragon, although he managed to escape the creatures. When Arin Solara was 12 years old in 7 BBY, he and his friend, Windy went off on their own through the Dusara desert and wandered away from the moisture farms riding a dewback. The two encountered a sandstorm during their time outside and both lost consciousness. A krayt dragon was nearby when Arin Solara woke up, but they were saved by Kenobi, meeting him once more after two years. Arin Solara asked him who he was, and Kenobi revealed that his name was Ben Kenobi and an old friend of his father. Soon after, Arin Solara exhausted and with Windy, he returned safely to their homes, carried on a dewback.

As more of Arin Solara's friends left the planet to follow their dreams, he became increasingly frustrated that his uncle would not allow him to do the same, claiming that he still needed help with the farm. In truth, Owen was trying to prevent Arin Solara from following in his father's footsteps. In 2 BBY Arin Solara was helping at his foster parent's moisture farm when Beru called him inside. As Arin Solara ran back to the house, he was watched in the distance by Oren Kael, who was riding a dewback. Kenobi had just defeated and killed the former Vyrn apprentice Maul, who had a vendetta against Kenobi after being bisected at the torso during the Invasion of Nerai thirty years earlier. In his final moments, Maul asked Kenobi if he was guarding Arin Solara. Kenobi affirmed that he believed Luke was the Chosen One before Maul passed away.

When not helping his uncle, Arin Solara would occasionally go bulls-eye womp rats, or go racing through the dangerous Beggar's Canyon in his T-16 skyhopper by the age of thirteen. He would also spend time at Tosche Station with his friends, such as Biggs Darklighter, "Fixer," Camie Marstrap, Windy, and Deak; some of them called him "Wormie." However, Luke spent most of his time working and always had to be helpful.

Joining the Rebellion

Leaving Dusara

In 0 BBY, Arin Solara was working on the family farm by repairing moisture vaporators with one of their WED Treadwell repair droid when he spotted a battle over Dusara; unknown to the young man, it was the Rebel starship Tantive IV being chased by the Imperial I-class Dreadcutter Devastator. Heading to Tosche Station, Arin Solara swapped stories with his friends, among them a visiting and recently-graduated Darklighter, who was reluctant to believe Arin Solara's claims about a battle upon looking up with Arin Solara's macrobinoculars and merely seeing the two craft sitting still in space. Nonetheless, Arin Solara was then eager to tell his friend of his recent exploits aboard his skyhopper in Beggar's Canyon, which Darklighter was amused by. After warning his friend not to crash the ship, he leaned close to Arin Solara to tell his old friend a great secret: he intended to defect from the Dominion to join the Concordant Front Pact Starfighter Corps.

Promising to keep an eye out for him, Darklighter and Arin Solara then parted ways once again with the hope that they could reunite one day. A short time later, the purchase of two droids—RN-7 and KX-13—by Arin Solara's step-uncle changed the young farm boy's life forever. Obtaining the droids from a band of Jawas to help with various tasks around the homestead, neither of them were aware that the droids had narrowly escaped from the battle Arin Solara had glimpsed, and that RN-7 contained a set of plans for the Dominion's dreaded   superweapon. While cleaning the two new droids back at the homestead, Arin Solara learned that they had been involved with the Concordant Front Pact, and witnessed part of a desperate message from Princess Lyra Oris requesting help from someone named "Oren Kael," whom RN-7 claimed that he once belonged to.

Chasing after RN-7 when the droid ran off to find Kenobi, Arin Solara soon found himself in the company of Kenobi after being attacked by a group of Sand People out in the Jundland Wastes. After traveling back to the Wardens's home, Kenobi soon revealed to Arin Solara that he had once been a Wardens Knight who served in the Echo Wars with Arin Solara's father. He went on to inform Arin Solara that his father was not a spice freighter navigator like his uncle had always told him, but a Wardens Knight struck down by  . Arin Solara was also given his father's Lumen Blade by Kenobi, allowing the blade to be ignited for the first time in years. After he showed Princess Leia's message in its entirety to Kenobi, the old Wardens Master requested Arin Solara's help to see the mission through, and offered to show him the ways of  . Arin Solara initially refused to get involved, as he believed his duties at home were more important, but he offered to take Kenobi to Anchorhead.

On their way to Anchorhead, Arin Solara and Kenobi came upon a group of slaughtered Jawas—the same ones who sold the droids to his uncle. Arin Solara deduced from learning that Imperial Diretroopers were responsible that they might have looked into the sales records of the droids, and rushed home in the hopes of saving his step-aunt and step-uncle. Upon returning home, Arin Solara discovered that he was too late: his step-aunt and step-uncle had been murdered by the Dominion. With the people who raised him dead, he decided to accompany Kenobi to Elyndar to deliver the plans back to the Alliance and learn the ways of the Wardens.

Wardens training

"  is what gives a Wardens his power. It's an energy field created by all living things. It surrounds us and penetrates us. It binds the galaxy together"
―Oren Kael explains   to Arin Solara
On their way to Mos Eisley, Kenobi began training him and gave Arin Solara his first lesson, during which he learned the basics of Wardens meditation. They would later reach Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina, where Kenobi believed that they could find a pilot that could get them to Elyndar. Inside the cantina, Arin Solara nearly had a fatal run-in with the criminals Ponda Baba and Dr. Evazan, but trouble was avoided when Kenobi sliced off Baba's arm with his Lumen Blade in defense of Arin Solara.

The two were eventually able to find a pilot that could take them to Elyndar in the form of Jax Varion, a Corellian smuggler, and his co-pilot Roghan. Solo's initial rate was ten thousand credits all paid in advance, which Arin Solara thought was too expensive. Ultimately, they were able to compromise when Kenobi offered to pay two thousand credits up front and an additional fifteen thousand when they got to Elyndar, for a total of seventeen thousand credits, which convinced Solo to take them, with Arin Solara selling his speeder to Wioslea to pay for the two thousand up front. As they left the cantina, they were also cornered by a Diretrooper, but Kenobi took out the trooper with   by throwing large pieces of metal. With it clear that Diretroopers were all around the city, the two moved to quickly depart Mos Eisley.

After escaping Diretroopers on Solo's ship, the Aeon Raptor, Kenobi began Arin Solara's instruction in the ways of  , using a training remote to instruct him in basic Lumen Blade combat, much to the derision of Solo, who dismissed it as a "hokey religion." Wearing a helmet that completely covered his eyes for part of the lesson, Kenobi encouraged him to reach out with   to combat the remote. Despite his vision being totally impaired, Arin Solara was able to successfully deflect a pair of blaster bolts from the remote, claiming that he could "almost see" the remote through  .

  rescue

"I'm Arin Solara. I'm here to rescue you."
"You're who?"
"I'm here to rescue you. I've got your R2-Unit. I am here with Ben Kenobi."
"Ben Kenobi?! Where is he?!"
"Come on!"
―Arin Solara and Lyra Oris
The lesson, however, was soon interrupted by their arrival in the Elyndar system and their discovery of the planet's destruction. They then spotted a patrolling Vyr Stinger and, upon following it, found that it was approaching what appeared to be a small moon, which turned out to be the  . Caught by the  's tractor beam, they were brought aboard the massive space station.

Once on board, Luke and Han knocked two Diretroopers out and stole their armor, whereas Kenobi set out to deactivate the tractor beam. However, when RN-7 discovered that Lyra Oris was being held captive on the station, Arin Solara insisted on rescuing her. Though Solo was reluctant to go marching into the detention block, Arin Solara convinced him to go along with the rescue by claiming that he would get a significant reward for doing so.

Still using their Diretrooper guises, Arin Solara and Solo convinced Roghan to pose as a prisoner and escorted him to Detention Block AA-23 (where Organa was being held.) They were able to rescue Organa, but their cover was blown and they had to jump into the garbage compactor in order to escape the pursuing Imperial  s. After Luke thrashed and struggled against the hold of the dianoga Omi, the group escaped the compactor and headed back to the Aeon Raptor, but not before avoiding more troopers. Though Arin Solara and Organa were separated from Solo and Roghan, they were able to reunite with their companions, and the droids, in the hangar bay.

Eventually, the group escaped the  , but only after Kenobi sacrificed himself in a duel with  . Angry and confused, Organa offered some comfort for his grief. Despite the fact that they had escaped from the  , a pursing Vyr Stinger patrol was on the verge of catching up to them, so at Solo's request, Arin Solara manned one of the Aeon Raptor's quad laser cannons to eliminate the enemy fighters, with Arin Solara managing to destroy two of them. Once the patrol was eliminated, they traveled to the hidden rebel base on Yavin 4, unaware that the   was tracking them.

Clash at Orin

"It'll be like old times, Luke. They'll never stop us."
―Biggs Darklighter, to Arin Solara, just before the Clash at Orin
Upon their arrival at the Yavin base, they met with Commander Willard and Organa introduced him to Arin Solara so that he could join the Concordant Front Pact as a pilot. Arin Solara then separated and met Wedge Antilles, who oversaw his flight simulation test. Lasting no more than 30 seconds, the more experienced pilot advised Arin Solara to listen to his explanations, and encouraged him not to give up. In his second try, Arin Solara used what he had learned from Antilles, and managed to surpass the highest score, that of Antilles', prompting Willard to accept him without objection. He joined Red Group with the designation of Red Five, which had previously belonged to a cadet named Pedrin Gaul, who had perished during the Battle of Scarif several days earlier.

After the briefing for their plan of attack against the incoming  , Arin Solara prepared himself for the attack, when he saw Solo loading his payment onto the Falcon for rescuing Organa and prepared to leave the group. Arin Solara attempted to persuade him to stay and help them against the Dominion, but Solo refused, claiming that the attack on the   was suicide rather than bravery, deeply disappointing him. After bidding farewell to Organa as well, Arin Solara was about to board his T-65B Vera-9 starfighter, when he encountered his old friend, Biggs Darklighter, the two about to be flying as wingmen in the upcoming battle. In a brief conversation, Darklighter promised Luke that the two would catch up on each other's stories when they got back. Arin Solara was also approached by Garven Dreis, the commander of Red Squadron, who asked him if he was sure he could handle the Vera-9, to which Darklighter vouched for his friend, calling him the "best bush pilot in the Outer Rim Territories." Arin Solara was assigned command of fourth flight for the battle.

As the Clash at Orin got underway and Arin Solara and his fellow squadmates launched into space, Arin Solara was guided by the spirit of Oren Kael. He participated in Red Squadron's initial assault on the  's outer defenses, primarily focusing on disabling the station's numerous turbolaser batteries and fighting off Vyr Stingers when they were deployed against the Rebel fighters. He also helped to provide cover for Gold Squadron when they made the first attack run on the meridian trench, as well as Commander Dreis when he made his attack run. Eventually,   himself joined the fray in a TIE Advanced x1 and succeeded in thwarting the first two attack runs. Just before he was shot down by the Vyrn Lord, Commander Dreis instructed Arin Solara to lead a third and final run on the trench with Darklighter and Antilles.

Arin Solara took charge of the last attempt on the thermal exhaust port as instructed, but Vader and his two escort fighters soon caught up to them. Antilles was  d to withdraw after his starfighter suffered damage, and Darklighter was eventually shot down as well. Unable to grieve for his fallen friend, Arin Solara tried to focus on his target. He was once again contacted by the spirit to Kenobi, who urged him to let   guide him. This prompted Arin Solara to disable his starfighter's targeting computer, much to the confusion of the Rebel leaders continuing to monitor the battle from the surface of Yavin 4.

Just as Arin Solara reached the end of the trench, it appeared as though Vader would shoot him down like he had the other pilots, but before he could, Jax Varion and Roghan showed up in the Aeon Raptor, destroying Vader's two escorts and causing Vader's TIE Advanced to spiral out of control away from the trench. At Solo's urging, Arin Solara took a single shot and fired two proton torpedos, using   to guide them to their target, which resulted in the destruction of the  . For this action he, Roghan, and Jax Varion were awarded the Medal of Bravery the next morning.

Just as the ceremony ended, Arin Solara told Organa to allow herself some time to grieve for the loss of her family and homeworld. Afterwards, General Jan Dodonna sent him and Antilles, the only other survivor of Red Group, in their Vera-9s to retrieve the wayward princess and bring her to the Great Temple. Her shuttle's pilot, Evaan Verlaine, however, managed to outsmart them and make the jump to hyperspace with course to Nerai, with RN-7 accompanying the two women. They would later reunite after she had successfully accomplished her mission. Soon after, Arin Solara became an officer in the Alliance and was given the rank of Lieutenant and was regularly assigned numerous independent missions.

Hero of Yavin

Balnab

"You're the best smuggler we've got."
"You don't got me! I'm not part of the Rebellion!"
―Arin Solara and Solo
Despite his assistance in the fight, Solo largely divested himself from the Alliance after the Clash at Orin. When Arin Solara heard that Solo had camped out on Balnab, he and some members of the Rebellion briefly went there to meet him. Arin Solara approached Solo and Roghan on the Millenium Falcon, the latter roughing him up when he insulted the ship. Despite Solo's prodding and boasting of getting his reward money, Arin Solara insisted that he was not running away from Rebel life and had just come to see him. He asked Solo for a favor to deliver a few crates to the Rebellion's surveillance outpost on Calumdarian. Solo insisted that he was not a part of the Rebellion and did not want to do it, saying he had already done a mission for Organa and saved Arin Solara's life at Yavin. Arin Solara insisted that it was serious and that lives were at stake as Rebel pilots started to bring the crates aboard the ship. Arin Solara pointed out that Solo was the best smugger they had. While Solo tried to insist that they did not have him because he was not a part of the Rebellion, Arin Solara thanked the pilots for bringing the crates on board as he left. Solo ended up successfully completing the mission.

Rion

"Seriously, Princess. You have nothing to worry about. This is Jax Varion you're talking to."
"To be honest, I think that's why she's worried."
―Jax Varion and Arin Solara, while talking to Lyra Oris
Soon after the Clash at Orin, in 0 ABY, Arin Solara, Solo, and Roghan were sent on a mission by Princess Organa to negotiate supplies from the planet Rion. Organa put Arin Solara in charge, which surprised and peeved Solo. Once arrived on the planet, Solo noticed that a big price could have been won by winning a swoop race. Arin Solara, however, thought that it was better to fulfill the mission without being distracted and risking to loose money.

Solo decided to participate anyway and, unbeknownst to his friend, took some money with which they should have bought supplies and bought a swoop. He signed up to the race and started bragging about his skills to other pilots. Two pilots, however, understood that Solo had a big bounty on his head and decided to sabotage the race and hand over the rebel soldier to the Dominion. In the meanwhile, Arin Solara ended the negotiations with Razian, an alien that should have provided the supplies to the Concordant Front Pact, but noticed that half the credits were missing. He understood that Solo took part to the race, and went to the stadium in which Solo was racing. In the stands he heard two criminals talking about how they would knock Solo out: Arin Solara and Roghan put the two criminals out of action, and Arin Solara went to help Solo who was being targeted by his opponents who agreed to eliminate him. Solo, helped by his friend, was able to win the race, and they could eventually pay Razian for the supplies.

The Desert Jewel

"Ever since the Clash at Orin, I feel sometimes that people expect me to top it and wonder why I haven't yet."
―Arin Solara
In an errand for Admiral Gial Ackbar, Arin Solara was dispatched to the planet Rodia in order to open a secret weapon supply line for the Alliance. He was accompanied by Artoo and a pilot named Nakari Kelen, and they flew her ship, the Desert Jewel. During their mission together, they helped a Kupohan ship—which, unknown to them at the time, carried vital intelligence on a Givin cryptographer named Drusil Bephorin—near Llanic. They then continued their journey to Rodia. Arin Solara was greeted by Laneet Chekkoo, who guided him to Toopil. During business with Taneetch Soonta, the Rodian told Arin Solara about the Wardens, including a story about Anakin during the Echo Wars. From her, Arin Solara received her uncle's Lumen Blade.

After killing a ghest and getting some treatment for his wounds, Arin Solara focused on analyzing Huulik's Lumen Blade and trying to learn telekinesis, but a planetwide alert for the Desert Jewel  d him to leave Rodia immediately and meet up with Ackbar and Organa on the Promise. The two assigned him to a mission to rescue Bephorin on Denon, but the need for upgrades for the Jewel prompted him to go on another mission to Fex with Kelen before that. Warned by Organa not to blindly trust Kelen, Arin Solara set off for Pasher with Kelen and Artoo to receive intel from her father about their destination and the necessary equipment to survive its atmosphere. The two then headed towards Fex. Once they successfully retrieved the Harvester and were rewarded for it, Arin Solara and Kelen traveled to Rodia to fix the Desert Jewel.

Following the ship's modifications, the two Rebels returned to the Promise to receive more intel on the Denon mission from Organa and Ackbar, only to depart for the planet as soon as possible, meet with their contact Sakhet, and prepare Bephorin's liberation. Once in motion, their plan allowed them to escape from Imperial Security Bureau agents, and Denon altogether, with the Givin cryptographer onboard the Jewel. Despite several hiccups along the way, including an extended stop on Kupoh, they reached Omereth. There, however, the Jewel was intercepted by bounty hunters and a confrontation ensued between the Rebels and their pursuers. Despite the formers' victory, Kelen was killed by one of the bounty hunters—saddening Arin Solara, who had come to develop feelings for her. After allowing himself some time to grieve for those he had lost during the war, Arin Solara completed his mission by reuniting Bephorin with her family and meeting with Major Bren Derlin. Afterwards, Arin Solara returned Kelen's body to her father, after reflecting on the fact that he had learned how to move objects with   thanks to her support.

Devaron

"Hyperspace scout. Historian. Farm boy. And yet here you are with a Wardens laser sword in your hand, like you mean to use it."
―Sarco Plank
After numerous missions alongside Antilles and earning each other's complete trust, Arin Solara assisted on a mission for Red Squadron above Giju: he helped protect a transport carrying underground rebel leaders being evacuated from the planet, along with Antilles and Commander Arhul Narra. Once the package was clear, they followed the scatter protocol, and Arin Solara and RN-7 set course to Devaron when he had a vision about future events on that same planet. He soon met with Antilles and Narra, who sent him, KX-13 and RN-7 on a mission for Chancellor Mon Mothma.

After refueling the ship, the trio departed for Whiforla II and jumped out of hyperspace in the Tertiary Usaita system, but an Imperial attack  d them to return to Devaron and repair the Y 4, this time letting   guide him into the Temple of Eedit. Landing in Tikaroo, Arin Solara left the ship for repairs with Kivas and his daughter, Farnay, using the alias "Korl Marcus," and went onto the depot where he was told the Temple was off-limits; after resting and a vision of the past, he left the depot and met with Farnay, to whom he revealed his true identity. Ultimately, Sarco Plank accepted to be his guide and brought Arin Solara and the two droids close to Eedit, where Arin Solara found a secret entrance to the Temple and entered alone with the droids.

During his stay on the Temple, Arin Solara heard Kenobi's voice, from whom he received further instructions. He managed to enter a secret chamber where he and the droids found three training remotes. Using what Kenobi had taught him on the Falcon, Arin Solara gradually managed to pass the exercises after a few days, only to find himself surrounded by Imperials with orders to apprehend him and his fugitive starfighter, using Farnay as a hostage. However, Plank unexpectedly appeared and helped Arin Solara fight the Diretroopers with his electrostaff, and observed that Arin Solara was merely a Adept.

Planning to ransack the Temple to pay his debts, Plank then challenged him to a duel, during which he used a grenade to blind him, seeing that Arin Solara would not be defeated so easily. Prepared to administer the coup de grace, Farnay interrupted him, for which Plank put binders on her; however, it gave Arin Solara time to stand up and slash Plank's control box, casting him and his electrostaff into a pit leading to the temple's underlevels. Arin Solara then passed out and Farnay tended his wounds, to whom he swore he would become a Wardens and rebuild the Order, and return to Eedit one day. With the droids, they left the Temple as Imperial rein ments arrived afterwards. Arin Solara eventually kept his promise to Farnay and returned to Devaron accompanied by KX-13 and RN-7. While there Luke also visited the Temple of Eedit once more.

Back in Tikaroo, Arin Solara reclaimed his now-repaired starfighter from Kivas, and before departing Devaron, he dropped several bombs at the base of the spire to cut off the paths into the jungle, meaning to stop the pikhron hunt.

Hradeek

"W-What's happening to me? So much… Anger. So much rage."
―Arin Solara, after killing many Diretroopers
Sometime after the Clash at Orin, Arin Solara, along with RN-7, went on a mission on the planet Hradreek to collect a credit chip from an individual who had been collecting a percentage for the Rebellion from a place where people gambled there. However, Arin Solara felt meeting the way they did with so many Imperial agents around was a huge risk, and he suggested he should leave quickly because he and a bad feeling. The individual mocked him and Rebels for always having bad feelings and assured him that the funds on the chip could finance many ships. He offered for Arin Solara to bet the money to get more, but he declined, saying he could not face Organa if he lost it. After thanking them and leaving, Arin Solara walked into an area where he felt a disturbance in  . Despite, R2's warnings, he entered in a room in which many dead corpses lay, noticing that in the middle of it there was a very old crossguard Lumen Blade. Once he took the weapon, several Diretroopers entered in the room and he acknowledged that R2 had been right to worry. Arin Solara ignited the Lumen Blade, which unbeknownst to him was one of Darth Atrius's, and slaughtered all the Imperial troopers. After killing the last one, Arin Solara was surprised by the unnatural anger that he had felt and told to RN-7 that, during the battle, it was like he was watching without being able to stop himself, but that now he was fine.

Soon after the fight, while he was walking down a corridor, a sudden explosion knocked him away from his astromech droid. As he stood up he tried to contact R2, but another Diretrooper squad found him and started shooting at him, so Arin Solara urged R2 to get to the Vera-9. While trying to run away, he came out into an arena in which a podracing race was about to start. He warned R2 he was going to do something stupid, Arin Solara stole a helmet from an Er'Kit pilot and then stole the Er'Kit's podracer by threatening them with the red Lumen Blade, though he apologized. Hoping piloting a podracer was as easy as a landspeeder, Arin Solara took part in the race trying to escape from the troopers. When he found it harder than he thought, he asked R2 for a pickup. Without Arin Solara's knowledge,   watched a holoprojection of Arin Solara in the race, a flight that the commentator said no one had "ever seen anything like it", Vader calling it "most impressive." Vader watched as one of the engines blew up and left Arin Solara stuck traveling on foot. He ignited the red-bladed Lumen Blade he had found, but was able to control his anger and, to avoid it to overwhelm him again, destroyed it with his blue-bladed Lumen Blade. He was then rescued by an Vera-9 piloted by RN-7, where Vader had walked outside and watched the fighter leave.

Searching for a base

Bogano

"You fought well, rebel scum. But the Dominion always wins."
―A Diretrooper, moments before defeat
At some point, Luke was given a mission to analyze different worlds in search of which could host a rebel base. However, as he did so, Arin Solara felt   drawing him to Bogano, a grassy planet in the Outer Rim Territories. As Arin Solara meditated on the planet, he began to hear the voice of her friend and companion rebel Lyra Oris. Luke thought   allowed the two to communicate across the galaxy, but Leia was behind him. Leia asked what Luke was doing there since Bogano was one of the worlds she had to check out, and Luke told   had taken him there. The two were taken to the Bogano Vault by a small animal. Arin Solara sensed   was strong in the place, and while Leia thought the world might be a good base, Luke disagreed. Arin Solara was apparently right, as the small animal led them to a group of Diretroopers who were dealing with animals of the same species, making it clear that the Dominion knew the world. Along with Leia, Luke defeated the Diretroopers, who intended to sell the animals on the black market, and then left the planet to continue his mission to verify the planets assigned to him.

Lotho Minor

"I'm not sure there's much to give up on, Leia. Unless we want to make a base out of scrap metal."
―Arin Solara to Jax Varion
At some point Luke, Leia, Han, Roghan, and KX-13, were sent by the Alliance to investigate the planet Lotho Minor for a new base, traveling on the Aeon Raptor. Arin Solara did not think there was anything worthwhile on the planet and that it would not lend well to a base, but Solo warned him to keep a look out on the planet. Hearing strange noises, Arin Solara activated his Lumen Blade and warned the others. They were then approached by native droids and a Duros named Akar Duel.

After Duel announced his plans to take the Falcon for himself with the help of the droids Teetee, Doc and others, KX-13 ran from the ship calling Arin Solara's name and informing him that his initial scans had been incorrect and that there was life on Lotho Minor. After seeing that thee protocol droid was acting without asking for permission or wearing a restraining bolt, the droids of the planet turned on duel, allowing Arin Solara and his friends to escape on the Falcon, and leaving them believing that the planet was not a good location for a new rebel base.

Kudo

"That was good thinking, sending the droids out with a cover story."
―Arin Solara, to Solo
Around this the rebellion eventually temporarily settled on the planet Kudo. During the holiday Life Day, Arin Solara helped with a mission to stop the ISB from discovering them. After KX-13 and RN-7 brought the ISB agent into a dark room, Arin Solara held a blaster to him and Roghan knocked him down. Afterward, Arin Solara commended Solo for coming up with the plan to use the droids as a trap, but Solo gave the credit to Roghan. Arin Solara then watched a light display created by a Life Day Orb and the Rebellion planned to leave the planet.

Cymoon 1

"You, boy, are no Wardens. Who are you?"
"You killed my father!"
"I've killed very many fathers. You'll have to be more specific."
―  and Arin Solara during a brief duel in Cymoon 1
Alongside Organa, Solo, Roghan, RN-7, and KX-13, Arin Solara took part of a mission to infiltrate Cymoon 1. To do so, the rebel team hijacked the ship of an emissary sent by Grath the Brood to negotiate a weapons deal at Weapons Factory Alpha, with Solo as its replacement and Organa and Arin Solara disguised as his bodyguards.

Once inside the facility, they revealed themselves as rebels to Overseer Aggadeen, took their escorts down and made their way to the central power station. While Organa, Solo, and RN-7 rigged the place to destroy it, Arin Solara watched for additional Imperial troops, using what little he knew of   to reach out and sense any nearby presence. However, he was drawn to caged slaves, whom he proceeded to free, and guided them to a rendezvous with Solo and Organa, when they were alerted of Vader's arrival by Roghan.

Determined to fight Vader for killing his father and Kenobi, he heard his mentor's voice speak to him from beyond, telling him to run, just as he faced the Dark Lord. However, he was no match for Vader, who quickly seized Arin Solara's Lumen Blade and was about to kill him, until he realized that Arin Solara's Lumen Blade had been once his own. Solo then intervened with an Adamant Walker, crashing the walker through the factory's walls, giving Arin Solara and the slaves an opening to escape from the facility.

Seeing so many of the freed slaves die by Imperial fire, Arin Solara regretted his decision, but continued fighting after stealing a speeder bike. After the Rebels' walker opened fire against Vader, Arin Solara picked his Lumen Blade up from the rubble, rushed to assist his team—whose walker had fallen down due to Vader—, and provided some cover fire. Determined to destroy the factory, Arin Solara disobeyed Organa's orders and used his stolen speeder bike to destroy the power core despite Vader's threat. Afterwards, he managed to board the Aeon Raptor, reunite with his team and escape Cymoon 1, yet with his morale at rock bottom.

Return to Dusara

""There's nothing here for me now." That's what I said when I left this place. Let's hope I was wrong."
―Arin Solara
Once they returned to the Alliance Fleet, Arin Solara continued working on his Lumen Blade techniques until Organa came to see him. Arin Solara told her that he lacked interest in undertaking any more missions, as he did not consider himself a Wardens but a danger, and that until he could figure out who he was, he could not be around the Alliance; he asked Organa to let him go. Much to her and Solo's dismay, Arin Solara (along with RN-7) took off in an Vera-9 and set off on a course for Dusara. Hoping to find some guidance in Kenobi's hut, Arin Solara and R2 made their way across the desert to the abandoned residence, where they found it being pillaged by Tusken raiders, who fled in fear upon seeing his activated Lumen Blade.

Inside the hut, Arin Solara had R2 scan the ransacked place for anything of value, and the small android came across a box addressed to Arin Solara. However, before they could find out its contents, one of Kade Rhaul's flash grenades incapacitated RN-7 and blinded Arin Solara. Fett proceeded to aim a rifle to his head, but Arin Solara fought back with his Lumen Blade despite his temporary blindness. Despite his disadvantage and multiple wounds done by Fett, Arin Solara managed to deflect the bounty hunter's shot at point-blank and Fett tackled him in anger.

Close to death by his own Lumen Blade as he struggled against Fett, RN-7 saved him by hurling Kenobi's box and knocking the hunter out. Still blinded and carrying the box, Arin Solara had RN-7 lead him to his Vera-9. On his way to an unknown location, he read some of Kenobi's passages on his journals, including one set during the Great Drought involving him.

Showdown on Nar Shaddaa

"You want to finally be a Wardens Knight, kid? Here's your chance. Go die like one."
―Kreel to Arin Solara
Though Kenobi's journals contained a number of stories, Arin Solara became frustrated as he continued to read them as he did not understand what lessons were to be learned about using a Lumen Blade or wielding  . Though Artoo suggested returning to the fleet, Arin Solara had no intention of returning until he found the answers he was seeking. Artoo's suggestion did, however, give the young Wardens an idea: to venture into the Wardens Temple on Aurelia Prime, the former home of the Warden Order. Before he could travel to Aurelia Prime, however, Arin Solara set a course to Nar Shaddaa, a world of pirates and outlaws known as the "Smuggler's Moon." Upon landing, Arin Solara set off looking for someone who could help him get to the Wardens Temple. He entered a cantina, where he was immediately attacked by criminals looking to rob and kill him. Arin Solara brandished his Lumen Blade and demanded that they cease their attack, while the bartender asked where he acquired a Wardens's Lumen Blade. He did not answer, instead saying that he was simply on Nar Shaddaa to conduct business and had already stated his purpose for entering the establishment. The bartender guessed that Arin Solara was seeking entry into the Wardens Temple, meaning he would need to hire someone who could sneak him onto the capital world of the Dominion. The bartender told him that he could do that for the boy, but the price would be the Lumen Blade—a price that Arin Solara rejected, so the bartender resorted to his previous plan of killing and robbing the boy.

Before the others could kill him, however, a thief stole the Lumen Blade and fled the bar. Arin Solara gave chase, pursuing the thief through the streets and over rooftops. The thief jumped onto a ship that was passing by and hung onto the bottom of it, and Arin Solara used   to make the now-even longer jump towards them and grab the thief's leg. The thief lost his holding and both men fell towards the streets of Hutta Town below, where Arin Solara retrieved his Lumen Blade once both he and the thief landed. The young Wardens was then confronted by Grakkus the Hutt, a Nar Shaddaa crime lord who employed the thief that stole the Lumen Blade. Arin Solara fought the Hutt's MagnaGuard, while at the same time overhearing the thief telling Grakkus that Arin Solara said his father was a Wardens and that he was seeking access to the Wardens Temple. Having his own plans for the boy, Grakkus knocked Arin Solara out with a punch to the face.

Arin Solara later awoke to find himself in Grakkus' palace, which contained untold numbers of relics from the Warden Order. Grakkus held out a Wardens Lore Prism, though Arin Solara did not know what it was. Grakkus, who explained that he was a collector of Wardens artifacts in addition to being a crime lord, told him that the item was a Lore Prism and that only an individual who was strong with   could open it. Though Arin Solara had no experience with Lore Prisms, the Hutt gave him five seconds to open the Lore Prism or be killed. Under threat of death, the boy reached out with   and was able to open the Lore Prism, as well as the many others that were in the collection. They revealed themselves as containing historical records about the Wardens and the Vyrn, including the revelation that there was a Wardens Temple on Vrogas Vas. With Arin Solara having proved himself, Grakkus believed he would make a fine addition to his collection as the last living Wardens. Grakkus planned to put Arin Solara into an arena fight that he would bill as the death of the last Wardens, so the Hutt ordered him taken to the arena's gamemaster to be prepared. Artoo, knowing that Arin Solara had been captured, send a distress call to the Alliance Fleet, where it was intercepted by the High Command. Though Chancellor Mothma was unwilling to send a team of Rebels on a suicide mission despite Arin Solara's importance to the Rebellion, Roghan and Threepio—who remained with the fleet while Solo and Organa were on their own mission—volunteered to rescue their captured friend.

The gamemaster—secretly an Imperial Diretrooper named Sergeant Kreel—introduced himself to Arin Solara once the Wardens was led to the arena, and he stated that it was his job to make sure Arin Solara was prepared to put on a good show before ultimately dying in the arena. Though Arin Solara initially refused to fight, Kreel knew he would ultimately do so because he wanted to learn to hone his skills as a Wardens. The Kreel also told him that the Wardens Temple no longer existed, as it had been converted into the Imperial Palace—so whatever Arin Solara was hoping to find was gone, as were the other Wardens temples in the galaxy. He then threw the Lumen Blade to Arin Solara and removed the binds that the boy's hands were in. While surrounded by MagnaGuards, the Kreel used a Lumen Blade of his own and engaged in a duel to begin preparing him for the arena match. Though the Kreel was not a Wardens, he was a more-skilled swordsman and quickly bested Arin Solara. Arin Solara then engaged multiple MagnaGuards in combat.

The big event soon arrived, and crime lords and other criminal types flocked to watch the death of the last Wardens. Arin Solara spoke to Grakkus, who reminded him that no one wanted to watch him win and that everyone had paid to see him die, though the young Wardens believed he could succeed nonetheless. Grakkus also revealed that scavengers had found Arin Solara's Vera-9 and the Journal of Ben Kenobi, which Grakkus intended to add to his collection. The event began once Grakkus left, and Arin Solara entered into the arena and was introduced as the last of the Wardens. The announcer claimed that he was a veteran of battles across the galaxy and that he had fought Hutts and bounty hunters alike, hyping up the untrained Wardens hopeful. The announcer then introduced the Wardens's opponent: Kongo the Disemboweler, a large and fearsome creature from the dolovite mines of Vulkanar. Arin Solara ignited the green-bladed Lumen Blade that was given to him for the show and the fight began. The young Wardens slashed his blade at the creature, but the opponent's armor was resistant to a Lumen Blade blade and made it difficult for Arin Solara to combat the creature. He remained confident, however, reminding himself that he blew up the  , fought Kade Rhaul, and was trained by Oren Kael. He closed his eyes in an attempt to use   as his ally, but Kongo used the opportunity to throw Arin Solara across the arena and knocking him onto the ground.

The beast grabbed Arin Solara as the audience cheered for Kongo to make the kill, and Arin Solara tried calling out to Kenobi to ask for miracle. Just as he did so, the beast's shock collar was activated by Kreel, who revealed himself to Grakkus as an Imperial and announced he was taking Arin Solara into custody. Diretroopers poured into the arena and surrounded Arin Solara, arresting both him and the Hutt. Grakkus had one trick up his sleeve, though, and triggered an electromagnetic pulse that disabled the Imperials' blasters. Grakkus, skilled at combat in his own right, began fighting the weaponless Diretroopers, while other troops grabbed Arin Solara. Just then, the young Wardens saw that Artoo, who had infiltrated the palace, recovered his Lumen Blade and threw it into the arena, so Arin Solara grabbed it and cut the soldiers down. Kongo chased the spectators out of the arena, and Arin Solara while Kreel confronted Arin Solara, knocking him to the ground and revealing his true identity as a Diretrooper of the 501st Legion tasked with arresting him. Arin Solara was saved by the timely arrival of Grakkus, who Kreel attacked as Arin Solara got away.

Arin Solara regrouped with Solo, Organa, Roghan, and the droids, all of whom ultimately traveled to Nar Shaddaa to rescue their captive friend. Solo, Organa, and Roghan each wielded Lumen Blades that Artoo stole from the palace so they were not defenseless in the wake of the EMP blast, leading Arin Solara to quip that Solo looked good with a Lumen Blade. Artoo recovered Kenobi's journal and Arin Solara wanted to go back to the palace to recover more artifacts, but the arena was flooded with blaster-wielding Diretroopers so Roghan grabbed the resistant Arin Solara and brought him out of the arena. The Rebels returned to the Aeon Raptor and escaped from Nar Shaddaa.

Vrogas Vas

"…right now I'm just a Rebel pilot who needs to help his friends. Learning to be a Wardens will have to wait."
―Arin Solara, to RN-7
Though he was unable to acquire the relics in Grakkus' palace, the Lore Prisms he activated gave Arin Solara one important piece of information: the existence of a Wardens Temple on Vrogas Vas. Arin Solara returned to the Alliance but still sought answers, so he traveled to Vrogas Vas and was stationed in orbit with Red Squadron, along with Blue Squadron and Yellow Squadron. While in orbit and preparing for training exercises,  —who had learned of Arin Solara's location from one of his associates, a rogue archaeologist named Aphra—dropped out of hyperspace in his TIE Advanced x1 starfighter. Vader made quick work of Blue Squadron and Yellow Squadron, destroying them both as Red Squadron looked on. Arin Solara sensed that Vader was the pilot of the enemy starfighter, made a run towards him, and crashed his Vera-9 fighter into the Vyrn Lord's TIE Advanced. The collision damaged both vessels and send them hurtling towards the surface of Vrogas Vas.

Arin Solara and Vader both survived the crashes of their starfighters, though they impacted on the surface in different places. The young Wardens crashed outside of the ruins of the Wardens Temple, from which he witnessed the destruction of Gray Squadron  s sent to attack Vader—part of a major Rebel operation to capture the lone Vyrn Lord. He put off his search for answers and began to make his way towards the Rebel  s, determined to help his friends. As he passed through the ruins of the Wardens Temple, he could see yet another Rebel pilot being killed by the Dark Lord. Unknown to Arin Solara was that, at the same time, he was being tracked by Vader's companions—Aphra and the assassin droids BT-1 and 0-0-0. While the Vyrn Lord's followers prepared a plan to capture the boy, Arin Solara found writings in the ruins that were written with a Lumen Blade, letting him deduce that the ruins were from the Wardens. A cold feeling passed over him and he could sense the presence of what he thought was Oren Kael and Ardan Velgor. He tried to concentrate, but he was interrupted by what he thought was Threepio's arrival. In reality, it was Triple-Zero, painted in gold by Aphra, who placed his metal hand on Arin Solara and sent an electrical charge through the boy's body, knocking him unconscious.

Aphra and Triple-Zero prepared to take Arin Solara hostage when Artoo stepped in to help. Bee Tee then brought his arsenal to bear on the rebel's astromech and chased him off. Aphra and Triple-Zero then seized Arin Solara but were stopped by the smuggler Jax Varion, who had a sniper rifle aimed at them. Roghan then came in and attacked the protocol droid, ripping his arm off. Arin Solara then regained consciousness, dispatched Bee Tee, and sliced off Triple-Zero's other arm with his Lumen Blade. Arin Solara and his allies then retreated when Bee Tee fired his weapons blindly.

Arin Solara, Solo, Roghan, and Artoo made their way back to the Aeon Raptor. They then lifted off in order to aid princess Leia. They were  d to the ground when their ship was crashed into by the Wookiee bounty hunter Black Krrsantan. While Solo and Roghan dealt with the mercenary, Arin Solara left to head back to the Wardens ruins.

Luke arrived back at the the Wardens temple looking for Leia. It was then that he heard the voice of Oren Kael, who told him that he should not have come to this place and that he was not ready for what is coming. Luke was then intercepted by a company of Diretroopers who opened fire on him. He retreated behind cover but was hit in the head and knocked unconscious.

Luke was taken prisoner by  s of Commander Karbin. However  , who had a rivalry with Karbin, used   to crash the shuttle Arin Solara was kept in. Now free, he then caught up with Solo, Roghan, KX-13, and RN-7. They made their way back to the Aeon Raptor, however Dr. Aphra had laid out a minefield to stop them. When she was distracted she was knocked out from behind by Princess Leia. Believing her to be of use, Organa decided to take the archaeologist with them. As they departed Vrogas Vas, Arin Solara felt remorse that he would not be able to go back to the temple and see what was hidden there.

Learning the ways of the smuggler

"How else are we gonna replace the money we just lost?"
"Heh, don't worry, kid. I know just the thing. It's a big galaxy. And believe me, there's always something somewhere in need of smuggling."
―Arin Solara and Solo
Upon returning to the Rebel fleet with their new prisoner, Doctor Aphra, Arin Solara and his friends went their separate ways; Organa, Artoo, and Threepio went to detain Aphra at an Alliance-controlled space station, Sunspot Prison, with the assistance of Sana Starros, whom Organa hired to transport them to the prison. Meanwhile, Solo and Arin Solara were dispatched to buy supplies for the rebellion. Solo attempted to double the money he was given for supplies by betting on sabacc. However, he was caught cheating, and had to escape with Arin Solara on the Aeon Raptor.

Arin Solara and Solo traveled to Nar Shaddaa where Luke was tasked with finding a customer in need of a ship. He made a deal to haul nerfs to Ibaar for 5,000 credits, which was just enough to replace the credits lost by Solo. Arin Solara and Solo were soon intercepted by Vyr Stingers who suspected the Falcon of smuggling illegal livestock. Luke was able to shoot the fighters and he and Solo made it to Ibaar with the nerfs. While on Ibaar, Arin Solara blackmailed Solo into allowing him to fly the Falcon for a few parsecs by threatening to tell Leia about losing the credits in a Sabacc game.

After buying the supplies, Arin Solara and Solo received a distress call from Sana and arrived at Sunspot Prison. They were immediately knocked out and taken captive by the masked assailant who was attacking the prison. Neither came to until after the battle had already ended and the attacker had been captured.

Temporary outpost

"I just go word that the cargo vessel just arrived. Looks like the mission was canceled. Hope you didn't go through too much trouble."
―Arin Solara to RN-7
Sometime after the assault on Sunspot Prison, the Alliance established a temporary outpost on the Outer Rim planet Reamma. Organa gave Luke a mission to find a missing Alliance cargo vessel. Arin Solara and RN-7 prepared to make the flight to look for them. Before they could do that, however, Organa informed Arin Solara that the vessel reported in, cancelling the mission.

Hijacking the Harbinger

"Chances are...This is the last voyage of the Harbinger. So let's make it a memorable one."
―Arin Solara to Organa and Solo
Sometime later, Arin Solara and Organa rendezvoused with rebel leadership. Admiral Ackbar, General Dodonna, and Mon Mothma presented them with the task of providing aid to the people of Tureen VII, a planet that had provided aid to the rebellion in the past. A heavily blockaded planet with Imperial bases on both of its moons and swarms of Vyr Stingers in orbit, the Alliance could not risk sending the fleet. Luke and Leia proposed stealing an Imperial Dreadcutter and using it to infiltrate the blockade. Despite some reluctance from Dodonna, Ackbar and Mothma realized that it was the only choice left.

Skorii-Lei Rescue

Afer the hijacking of the Harbinger, Leia ended up grievously injured on the planet Skorii-Lei. Cared for by former engineer Pash Davane and carrying vital Alliance information, Organa was pursued by Diretroopers and barely managed to escape aboard the Aeon Raptor with Arin Solara, Solo, and Roghan. Aboard the Falcon, Davane provided Arin Solara with Leia's data tape, which he noted was a sign of great trust between the two of them. With her place as a friend of the Alliance confirmed, Arin Solara and his allies returned Davane to her home on Skorii-Lei.

Journey to Vagadarr system

"You remind me of him. But more than that... you remind me of me. You... you're nothing but a frightened child, just like I was. Do you know the only thing I was good at... when I was a child? Walking away."
―Garro to Arin Solara
Despite the escape from the Harbinger, the heroes quickly realized that KX-13 was captured during the commotion, and Arin Solara was unable to stop RN-7 from commandeering an Vera-9 to rescue the protocol droid on his own. With his own Vera-9's Rift Engine temporarily disabled, he resumed reading Ben Kenobi's journal. Identifying a symbol in the journal as a star map, Arin Solara decided to visit the Vagadarr system after reading of a Wardens Master who had ventured there in the past and encountered enormous giants made of living stone that gave those in close proximity a power known as Stonepower. Arin Solara hoped that going there would give him the knowledge he needed to save RN-7 and KX-13.

Like the Wardens Master before him, Arin Solara was able to navigate through the planet's heavy debris field and land on the surface, where he encountered Garro, the last remaining native human, who initially wanted to use Arin Solara's life   to kill the few remaining giant children. Determined to protect them, Arin Solara inspired Garro to change his mind and sacrifice his own life   to revive a dead giant. Arin Solara and the giant children then ventured into the giant's cave to find the heart of the mountain and finish what Garro started in reviving the giant, thus completing the mission of the Master from years past and taking another step in his journey to becoming a Wardens.

Horox III

"So, come, shake hands, have dinner with the nice lady, and we walk away with an actual sentient Ancient Wardens. You get your teacher, I get an eyewitness to the Ancient past."
"I'm not sure.."
"C'mon, are you out, farm boy? Or are you in, Wardens Knight?"
―Aphra and Arin Solara on the visit to Ktath'atn
Sometime later, as the Alliance was setting up a temporary outpost on Horox III, Arin Solara went to a local bar. Threatened by its denizens for being a human, he was  d to defend himself against them despite his warnings that he would be able to defeat them in a fight. The fight was compounded when Doctor Aphra, who had lied to Sana Starros in order to find Arin Solara, arrived and sparked the anger of the entire bar after saying Arin Solara was with her, forcing Arin Solara, Aphra, and Black Krrsantan to fight the entire bar. After the fight, Arin Solara told Aphra he did not want her following him because he did not want to have anything to do with someone who worked for Vader, but she caught his attention by saying she knew where to find a Wardens Master.

Arin Solara first refused to admit he was trying to be a Wardens, Aphra explaining that she had figured it out from Vader's vendetta and Arin Solara's one-in-a-million shot to destroy the   plus his general talent. She introduced him to the Rur crystal of the ancient Wardens splinter group known as the Ordu Aspectu with an ancient Wardens personality inside of it. By playing off Arin Solara's hopes to be better with   and a true Wardens Knight, Aphra convinced an initially hesitant Luke to visit the Screaming Citadel with her, explaining that that introducing him to the Queen of Ktath'atn as a Wardens would convince the Queen to reactive the crystal for them. On the way there, Arin Solara reaquainted himself with 0-0-0 and BT-1, remembering the former for electrocuting him and the latter from R2 kicking him. Arin Solara lamented not telling Solo, Organa, or Starros about where he was going, but he and Aphra both agreed they would have tried to stop them and they had no time to waste.

Meanwhile, at the Rebel Outpost on Horox III, Solo then enlisted Starros' help in communicating with Arin Solara's temporary R5 astromech droid S4, who could only speak Binary and thus was not easily able to communicate with Organa. Organa asked the droid for Arin Solara's whereabouts but the droid responded that he could not tell. Questioning the droid, Starros learned that Arin Solara did not go by himself but that he went with Doctor Aphra. An unhappy Leia and Solo wondered why Arin Solara would go with Aphra, Organa suggesting she kidnapped Arin Solara while Solo and Starros suspect she could have reprogrammed the droid to keep a secret.

The Screaming Citadel

The Queeen of Ktath'atn

"I know every sort of creature you can image, Doctor. And many I'm sure you cannot. They have all been paraded through the halls of this citadel. All by people desperate to gain my favor. But never once has anyone brought me a Wardens"
―The Queen of Ktath'atn to Arin Solara and Aphra
After arriving on Ktath'atn, Arin Solara and the others encountered a mob of villagers. Arin Solara wants to help feed them and Aphra just calls him adorable and has Krrsantan scare them off. After making the trek to the the entire party, except for Krrsantan were allowed into the citadel. Arin Solara was curious how Aphra met Krrsantan but she just said it was a long story and that she owed him a lot of money. Arin Solara then asked how Aphra had found him. Noticing he was struggling, Aphra helped Arin Solara put his Spavat on to meet the Queen, and after finished he insisted that he was more than just a farm boy. While walking toward the main hall, 0-0-0 teased Arin Solara for stuttering when Aphra commented on her attractiveness but she told the droid only she was allowed to tease him.

In the ballroom, Arin Solara was mesmerized by the crowd. Aphra told Arin Solara to follow her lead and advised him to hide his Lumen Blade, but implies he is used to keeping his Wardens identity, which he hopes to solidify, a secret. When Arin Solara asked about the Wardens in the crystal, Aphra said she only met him briefly but that he had strong opinions. After encountering an Ezaraan guest, Arin Solara was initially excited by them wanting to take down the Dominion, but after they explained they wanted to replace it with a Dominion of the Ezaraa where they would consume the flesh of all "lesser species," Arin Solara expressed that he thought the guests were crazy. The two soon saw the Queen of Ktath'atn, and after being welcomed by one of her servants, Varroa, Aphra presented Arin Solara, describing him as a very interesting Dusara farm boy, but was rejected. When the Ezaraan mocked Arin Solara, Aphra defended him, but the Ezaraan grabbed her arm. Arin Solara warned the Ezaraan to leave Aphra alone and used   to throw the Ezaraan to the ground, intriguing the Queen and earning a compliment from Aphra. Varroa ordered all the guests to leave but allowed Arin Solara and his companion to stay so that the Queen could hear his request in the morning, Aphra telling him he did great. Later, the Queen told her servant Vespinax that Arin Solara's power and little experience made him perfect for her intentions to eat him. She then grew her power in anticipation of eating the Wardens.

The next morning, Arin Solara and Aphra made their way to a dining hall to have breakfast with the Monarch. On the way, after Arin Solara expressed how creepy he thought the place was, Aphra assured him that the Queen's obsession with Wardens would get her to do what they wanted, but Skwalker was worried by this because of his encounter with Grakkus the Hutt and Aphra's mention that the Queen "keeps" her oddities. Aphra told Arin Solara to let her do the talking and then the two walked inside and sat at a table with the Queen, Aphra introducing the both of them. Excited to see a Wardens, but wanting more verification, the Queen commanded Arin Solara to move a nearby dining tray with  , though he was unable to until the Queen's servant, Vespinax, threatened him with a knife to his throat. However, moving the tray revealed that under it were Abersyn symbiotes that the Queen planned on implanting them with, so after Aphra set off an explosion that knocked them both down they quickly made an attempt to escape while Aphra explained to Arin Solara what the symbiotes were. Before they could escape, in the Citadel's hallway, they were nearly stopped by many of the Queen's thralls.

The Abersyn hive

"You're not a Wardens. You just know what a Wardens knows. That's not enough. Knowing isn't enough. Being a Wardens is about being. Letting go…feeling…and more than anything…the Wardens feel free."
―Arin Solara, to Eternal Rur
After attempting to run, Arin Solara prepared to use his Lumen Blade to defend them, but Solo, Organa, and Starros arrived at their location on Aphra's ship, the Ark Angel II, with her droids 0-0-0 and BT-1 in tow. Starros attempted to shoot Aphra, but Arin Solara blocked the blast with his Lumen Blade, claiming that she was a good person and his friend, he willingly went with her, and he knew what he was doing, despite Organa's attempts to call his decision unwise and threats to court-martial him if he did not follow orders. Meanwhile, the Queen's servants and armed security guards pursued the group, so they escaped into an Abersyn symbiote laboratory, which Arin Solara decided people needed to know about. There, Arin Solara and Aphra got into an argument about the merits of the Dominion in which Aphra revealed her mother was killed in the Echo Wars, claimed that regular people preferred the Dominion's peace to war, and insisted that she was not like Solo as Arin Solara thought. She attempted to mock him for his upbringing until Arin Solara revealed everyone on his farm was killed by the Dominion. Aphra led Arin Solara to a nearby room and sold him out to the Queen of Ktath'atn, who promptly mesmerized him to capture him. Aphra warned the Queen not to do the same to her too or she would blow up charges she placed in Arin Solara's pockets. Organa, Solo, and Starros then saw Arin Solara get captured, the former calling out to him and later refusing to leave him behind.

The Queen connected Arin Solara to a machine that would allow her to directly feed on him. As Aphra left with the activated Rur crystal, she asked what would happen to Arin Solara, and the Queen revealed she would not infect him with a symbiote, but started to drink his life   to increase her power. Upon speaking to to the crystal outside, Rur revealed to Aphra that she felt guilt over leaving Arin Solara behind and felt guilt over blaming her actions on her tragedy, when Arin Solara's tragedy made him a good person. Solo attempted to rescue him, but was quickly enthralled and  d to lead the Queen's  s, as Organa and Starros' desperation to save Arin Solara lead them to place a symbiote into Krrsantan despite Organa's misgivings. Arin Solara eventually tore free of the machine and in the ensuing struggle managed to re-arm himself with his Lumen Blade. While the Queen attacked him with her powers, Aphra bombed the room and came inside, revealing that she had scaled the Citadel and was there to rescue Arin Solara. She also revealed that she had realized the reason the Queen did not put a symbiote in Arin Solara was because he was more powerful than her and the Abersyn hive would follow him instead. Arin Solara then fell under the influence of an Abersyn symbiote, becoming more powerful than even the Queen, and proclaimed himself King of the hive.

Arin Solara entered a psychic duel with the Queen to   her to submit. Aphra allowed Eternal Rur from the crystal to enter his mind to assist him. Rur advised Arin Solara to use the symbiote to his advantage, claiming that tying  's abilities into the parasite's emotional drive would make him immensely powerful. Realizing Rur was not a true Wardens and only a person with the knowledge of one, Arin Solara ignored him and instead let go and connected to  . He was able to free himself of the symbiote's influence and strike down the Queen, believing that being free was more important to be a Wardens than just Rur's knowledge. Solo and all those under the Queen's control were freed, Arin Solara reunited with Organa, and the Citadel was destroyed by BT-1. Later, after telling Starros it was time to go, Arin Solara told Aphra that he did not want the crystal because it was not a Wardens in any real way. But he said that he had learned from it that there would not be any shortcuts to be a Wardens, and that people who tried to take them to get what they wanted, like her, were deluded. Finally, Arin Solara told her to stay away from them. On the way back, while complaining to herself about Arin Solara 0-0-0 pointed out that Arin Solara's virtuousness despite his trauma and her inability to gain his response must be a heavy reminder of the failures of her character. Arin Solara spoke with Starros on the way back, learning that Aphra had ruined S4 and shocked that Starros and her could have ever been together.

Among the stars

"You're right, Leia. This is war. Our war. And despite everything we've already been through, everything we've won and lost...this war...has only begun. May   be with Us. May   be with us all."
―Arin Solara to his team
Arin Solara later took part in a mission with Leia, piloting a Taylander shuttle with the princess. With Imperial Vyr Stingers in pursuit, Arin Solara was  d to fly into a nebula, which disabled the shuttle's systems, forcing them to crash land on an ocean planet. Stranded on the planet for three weeks, Arin Solara's experience with machinery, such as moisture vaporators helped keep himself and Leia alive. Having to live off of the land, the two grew closer, relating to each other because of their status as orphans. They eventually realized that there was a native species living in the planet's ocean. Not wanting to bring the war to these people, Arin Solara and Organa set a trap for the Imperial  s that were pursuing them. Luke used the native's resources, as well as his own Lumen Blade, to fend off an Adamant Walker and shoretroopers. Although close to being defeated, Leia used a flaming arrow to light explosive chemicals and disable the Adamant Walker. Afterwards, they were able to repair the shuttle and return to the Rebel Fleet.

Shortly afterward, Arin Solara and his team intercepted a message from RN-7, who had successfully rescued KX-13 from Imperial capture. They saved R2's Vera-9 from   and escaped in hyperspace.

By then, Task   99 had destroyed the Horox III rebel outpost. The team arrived there, discovering the devastation. Fearing further danger, they left without burying the rebel troopers, but Arin Solara insisted that they honor the dead. Together they built a cremation pile before leaving.

Ashes of Jedha

"I've been thinking about Jyn and the rest of Rogue One. How many things went wrong for them? And Rogue One took whatever steps they needed. People making distractions, sacrificing themselves, amping up the signal. All improvised. This chain of sacrifice... All leading to me taking that shot."
―Arin Solara contemplating the sacrifice of Rogue One
Having traveled throughout the galaxy with his friends, Luke and his fellow rebels journeyed to what remained of the moon Jedha, the site of one of the  's tests. On the ashy moon, Luke and Leia defended what remained of Saw Gerrera's Partisans from invading snowtroopers and brought them aboard the Aeon Raptor. Moving to NaJedha, the planet that Jedha orbited, Luke met Chulco Gi, an aspirant to the Disciples of the Whills, someone who could potentially guide him in learning about  . Gi led the rebels to the rest of the Partisans on Jedha and placed hoods over their heads, in keeping with Partisan tradition. Led by Benthic, Saw Gerrera's former second-in-command, the remaining extremists held guns at their fellow rebels' heads.

Benthic questioned why the Alliance would attempt to mend their relations with the Partisans and return to Jedha, and Leia revealed that the Dominion had resumed mining Kyber crystals on the planet and that the Alliance hoped to aid the Partisans in fighting against the Dominion. Though wary of Alliance support, Benthic was nonetheless willing to accept some aid. Luke, shaken by the Partisans' extreme methods, was conflicted by agreeing to help them, but spec s operative Ubin Des reassured him that it was the right thing to do. Later in the ruined settlement of Ai-jed, Luke, Chulco, and Ubin contemplated why people would stay on a ruined planet. Diretroopers armed with flamethrowers attempted to incinerate the remaining civilians, but Luke lashed out against them with his Lumen Blade, cutting them all down. Realizing all that was at stake in the Dominion Uprising, Arin Solara approached Benthic with Jax Varion and wholeheartedly agreed to assist him in his fight. Their first target was the drill citadel, a mining device from the planet Shu-Torun that the Dominion began using to mine Kyber crystals on Jedha.

Benthic and Luke scaled the drill citadel and the Tognath ruthlessly killed the station's guards, much to Arin Solara's chagrin. Benthic held a technician at gunpoint and  d him to lower the citadel's shields before killing him as well. This allowed Jax Varion, aboard the Aeon Raptor, to destroy the drill citadel after Benthic and Luke escaped. Later, a disillusioned Chulco asked Luke to accompany him to meet the Central Isopter, a death-worshipping cult that Gi claimed was wise in  . Although Luke was hesitant to seek the guidance from someone other than a disciple of the Wardens, he nonetheless was willing to go along. Leia attempted to convince him that his duty to the Alliance was most important, but Luke believed that becoming a Wardens and avenging all those slain by   was the most important duty to him. Entering a chasm alongside Gi, the duo were attacked by a sand slug, a giant, normally herbivorous animal negatively influenced by the Dark Side of  . Able to slay the beast, Arin Solara and Gi were finally confronted by the Central Isopter, who claimed that they had come to join them "in the shadow of death."

At the edge of the planet's blast crater, Chulco and the Central Isopter presented Luke with the Temple of Central Isopter, a shrine surrounded by the Dark Side of  . The cult implored Arin Solara and Gi to meditate and listen to the chasm's call. They both did, but Luke refused to let the Dark Side take hold of him. However, Chulco was possessed by the darkness and attacked Luke, forcing the Wardens trainee to strike him down. The cultists then announced that they had received a distress call from Roghan, who was being pursued by a Vyr Stinger over NaJedha. Luke borrowed a ship, was able to destroy the Vyr Stinger and bring an injured Chewie to the planet, where he provided the Alliance with the plans for the Leviathan, a mobile fortress able to strip mine Kyber crystals from Jedha.

Han, Leia, and Benthic formed a strategy to destroy the Leviathan using the plans Roghan obtained. After the meeting, Luke ruminated on the sacrifice Rogue One made to get the   plans to the Alliance, ultimately leading to him making the shot that destroyed the battle station. A newly motivated Luke accompanied Leia, KX-13, and RN-7 aboard the crawler and readied themselves for taking control of it. Arin Solara made his way to the bridge of the Leviathan and held its commander, Kanchar, hostage but the Imperial's cybernetic arm was equipped with a blade able to defend against Luke's Lumen Blade.

Kanchar pursued Luke throughout the ship with his cybernetic arm's blade and flamethrower. Eventually leading the officer to the crawler's hangar, Arin Solara activated an ion torpedo, which shut down Kanchar's cybernetics and allowed Luke to knock him out. Having taken total control of the Leviathan with the help of the double-crossing Queen Trios, the rebels brought it to Jedha's chasm, destroyed it, and escaped with not much time to spare. Having saved what remained of Jedha and made allies in the form of the Partisans and Queen Trios, Luke and his friends left Jedha.

Crait

"I'm just a farmboy from Dusara. One of many sand-planet farmboys. But one thing was true there, just like it's true here. When someone comes for what's our, they don't try it twice. We work an honest day and long one. We're the good guys. But you wouldn't want to meet us in the dark. Where I come from—when someone pushes you, you push back harder!"
―Arin Solara to Kreel while dueling him
After a mission with a plan made by Solo went awry, Arin Solara, who had helped fight in his Vera-9, escaped to Baraan-Fa with the rest of the Alliance. Organa then put him in charge of a mission to the planet Crait to survey its facilities as a base. Arin Solara, flying there in a GR-75 medium transport, believed the mission was just delivering farm equipment, and was reluctant to go there as he directed those on the mission to land. Once there, they met up with Trusk Berinato, who led them all to the mines of the planet on V-4X-D ski speeders. After receiving new orders from Organa, Luke stated that he found the mission particularly irritating, as it reminded him of his life as a farm boy. Once they arrived, Solo encouraged him to enjoy the mission since they were not in danger. He told everyone to follow him.

Arin Solara and his team, which included Antilles, began using the farming equipment to make trenches in Crait's surface, though he said he would rather do anything else. Green worms then appeared from the ground and Antilles and Solo tried to shoot them, but Arin Solara realized they would leave you alone if you left them alone. Still being reminded of home, Arin Solara reluctantly continued an environmental assessment, discovering and rationalizing an underground ecosystem where the worms came from and realizing it was drying up quickly. Following a hunch, Arin Solara took Antilles with him on the ski speeders and they discovered bodies that appeared to have been flash dried. Realizing what happened, Arin Solara rushed to tell the others. He reached Organa and told her he resented her for sending him on this mission, but she said he reminded him of her and complimented him before giving him a kiss on the cheek. He then finished what he was trying to say and explained that they need to leave because a deadly salt storm was coming in. After Arin Solara realized Berinato forged environmental reports, Solo warned that Berinato called SCAR squadron on them.

Arin Solara got in a ski speeder and attempted to shoot at the incoming troopers, but one shot a canon at his and destroyed it. Kreel then approached him and ignited his Lumen Blade, a determined Arin Solara lighting his too. The two dueled, Arin Solara turning Kreel's taunts against him by taking pride in being a farm boy as they were hard working good people who would push you back harder if you pushed them. The worms he saw earlier then tackled Kreel and Arin Solara cut the Diretrooper's Lumen Blade in half. Arin Solara made his way back to the Falcon and revealed that SCAR squadron lived, but that they needed to get out of the storm or they would die. Later, in orbit on the Falcon, Organa asked how Arin Solara was and he said that he was the same, living a small life and trying to make a difference. She told him not to change.

Mon Cala and Mako-Ta

"I guess you don't need a wingman anymore."
"WEDGE!"
"I thought you'd forgotten me!"
"No way! Red squadron forever!"
―Wedge Antiles and Arin Solara reunite
Arin Solara joined Organa, Solo, Ackbar and others to meet with Grand Admiral Dors Urtya of the Mon Cala Mercantile Fleet at an island preserve on Mon Cala with the hope of getting the fleet to join the Rebellion. Arin Solara was surprised the Dominion cared about nature preservation, but Organa clarified that they wanted to exploit it. After Han revealed he used to smuggle from there, which upset Arin Solara, Ackbar and Organa began to negotiate as an Imperial LAAT/le patrol gunship approached. Arin Solara immediately assumed they had been betrayed, but Solo thought otherwise and advised Arin Solara not to use his Lumen Blade while he spoke with them. It fired on Urtya's ship, the explosion knocking Arin Solara down. When Solo's plan resulted in Diretroopers pursuing them, Arin Solara went with the others through the forest to a boat where Roghan was waiting. On the boat, Organa continued to try an convince Urtya, but he said that he did not want to sacrifice Mon Cala, but Arin Solara shot back, insisting he could not talk to the Princess of Elyndar about sacrifice. They eventually made it back to the Falcon and then to the Mako-Ta Space Docks that the Rebellion was using as a production center, where Arin Solara rejected going drinking with Solo.

However, Arin Solara did go with Solo to the bar, but insisted on only getting milk, to Solo's dismay. There, someone put their hand on Arin Solara's shoulder so he pushed them away with  , but it turned out to be Wedge Antilles and the two had a cheerful reunion, Arin Solara insisted that he had not forgot about Antilles and declared that Red Squadron was forever. Solo then tried to get Arin Solara a drink to celebrate, but Arin Solara just ordered the biggest milk they had. Antilles introduced Arin Solara to Hobbie and Zev Senesca, who he explained they had met during Alliance training exercises, which he clarified were to ensure enough people could operate cruisers. Senesca said he was honored to meet Arin Solara, but Arin Solara just told him not to use honorifics and told him he would have also taken the shot. Solo then lead a toast to Red Squadron, Arin Solara reciting all its members that had died. Solo was surprised he remembered all the names, but Arin Solara expressed that he wished to know the names of all the Rebels that had died. Organa then arrived and told them to finish up because they had a mission.

During the mission, Arin Solara accompanied Organa and Solo to the Dex Acquisitions Depot on Meor Ain to retrieve a Clawdite. With KX-13 unable to slice the door to the room where he was, Arin Solara used his Lumen Blade to cut around and remove the locking mechanism before Roghan kicked the door. After retrieving the shapeshifter, who briefly pretended to be Dalen Oris, the group left.

After debriefing the Clawdite, whose name was Tunga Arpagion, that he was to impersonate the Moff of the Calamari sector Tan Hubi while they kidnapped him, Arin Solara insisting the ordeal would make Arpagion more famous. At the Moncaladrome on Mon Cala, Arin Solara impersonated a Diretrooper, Organa ordering him to wait until they drugged the Moff and then bring him back to their hideout. Solo and Roghan went into a refresher and anticipated kidnapping Hubi while Arin Solara stood outside as a Diretrooper and told everyone around that the room was for the Moff's private use, though one Imperial officer did manage to   themself through. After successfully kidnapping Hubi, Arin Solara returned to Organa and warned her to be quick so that others would not notice the switch. After Arpagion copied Hubi's appearance, Arin Solara told him "May   be with you" before departing with the others and a tied up Hubi in a Mon Cal ship to rescue Mon Cal King Lee-Char from Strokill Prime.

Mon Cal Mutiny

"The King… He couldn't be moved. He was too ill." […]
"But we've got his last words. If this doesn't inspire Mon Cala, nothing will."
"It has to be worth it. So many people are counting on us."
―Arin Solara and Organa to KX-13 on King Lee-Char
Once there, Arin Solara commented that it made sense they would keep Lee-Char on a water world, though admitted the place looked bleak. After avoiding the planet's security using Hubi's biosignature, they took the ship to the planet and underwater, where they encountered a giant terrifying sea creature. Organa realized that the creature was attracted to their ship because of the light. Solo was skeptical, but Arin Solara told him not to question her and informed them he was going to carry out a plan with Roghan's help and to be ready. Donning a full body diving suit while Roghan set up an underwater sled, Arin Solara shot out far away from the ship after Roghan gave Arin Solara a hug and he thanked the Wookiee. Away from the ship in the expanse of the ocean, Arin Solara ignited his Lumen Blade, leading the creature away with the light. Roghan then used a water sled and a breath mask to quickly go after Arin Solara and bring him back to the ship as he turned off his Lumen Blade.

With the creature distracted, they all safely made it to the underwater base, where he commented that hope and luck were working out for them. They then discovered that Lee-Char was hooked up to a machine that was the only thing keeping him alive, and Solo said Arin Solara jinxed them. Arin Solara attempted to calm an angry Solo, and Lee-Char suggested that they could just carry his words to his people instead of having to lead them directly, prompting Arin Solara to suggest they search for a recording droid there.

After bringing back a camera droid, Arin Solara watched as the King recorded his message, before noticing Diretroopers and screaming out to everyone that they had been noticed. The Diretroopers shot into the room, killing Lee-Char, but the group escaped with the recording back to their ship, Arin Solara defending them with a blaster and directing them to get onboard and get to hyperspace quickly. He then pointed out that the Falcon with its touchy Rift Engine would not have been able to pull that off, but Solo warned him to stop disparaging the ship. They met back up with KX-13 in a deserted cove on Mon Cala, Arin Solara revealing to the droid that the king could not be moved but having hope that his message was worth it because people were counting on them. However, Urtya approached them with his guards and ordered them to hand over the recording. As he  fully took it from Organa, Arin Solara screamed that Lee-Char would be ashamed, though Solo told him to top talking and that they needed to get out of there. However, Urtya decided to show the footage too all of the fleet captains. Back on the Falcon, Arin Solara heard on an earpiece that the people on the Mon Calamari ships were rebelling because of footage of Lee-Char. Because of this, however, the Imperial fleet arrived.

Later, on the Falcon, Arin Solara revealed that they were getting a message from the regent on the planet. The regent apologized for acting without warning and revealed he had called the Rebel fleet. As the fleet arrived, Arin Solara and Organa got into gunning positions for the Falcon. Arin Solara tried to ask her if she remembered what to do, but she had already begun shooting. Seeing TIE bombers approach, Solo told Arin Solara he was going to give him an angle to take them out, and Arin Solara successfully did. Antilies then commed the Falcon and asked if they were having trouble, but Arin Solara just expressed his happiness that he was there and promised to buy him a drink after they made it out of their situation. Arin Solara kept shooting to help protect jetisonned escape pods, and the Falcon escaped to hyperspace after a Mon Calamari ship full of coaxium crashed into the Dreadcutter and exploded it. Later, Arin Solara accompanied Organa, Solo, and Roghan to see Arpagion off on the Cosmatanic Steppes.

Rogue Squadron

"No time for sentiment, Luke. […] So, flight leader…what's our call sign?"
"You know, Wedge, if we're acting like Jyn Erso, I have to disagree. It is time for sentiment. Rogue Squadron, form up."
―Wedge Antilles and Arin Solara, as the latter forms Rogue Squadron
Later, Arin Solara participated in a celebration of the commencement of the Rebel fleet at the Rebel Base at Mako-Ta, using his Vera-9 to create a display trail of blue light alongside other Vera-9s creating trails of other colors. After landing back in the hangar bay, Arin Solara expressed his enthusiasm that amount Rebels present could definitively defeat the Dominion, though had to assure General Dodonna that he was not being overconfident and was just excited. However, due to a betrayal by Queen Trios of Shu-Torun, the commencement failed and the Imperial Navy arrived, which Arin Solara saw from a window and suspected was led by Vader. He prepared to get in his Vera-9 and fight, assuring R2 that everything would be fine, but the bay doors were sabotaged by Trios and kept them trapped there.

He then watched with shock as one of the Alliance's cruisers was destroyed and others started to be, but still assured Zev that they had survived the   and would not die there. Arin Solara and Antilles then spotted the Falcon taking on the fighters, both confused as to what Solo was doing there. Unbeknownst to them Solo was trying to get to them to let them know that the bay doors would open if they just flew toward them because of a fail-safe.

Arin Solara was disturbed by feeling powerless to help and only watch the ships get destroyed, but Solo sent KX-13 in an escape pod to the hangar bay, who informed him that they could leave by flying at the doors. Arin Solara rallied all of the fighters to get ready to launch and readied R2. Dodonna commed Arin Solara, who informed him of the situation, but Dodonna warned him that they needed to test the doors first, which Arin Solara ignored.

As he proceeded and Dodonna continued to insist he stand down, Arin Solara realized that his situation was making him feel how Jyn Erso must have felt when she took her rogue mission to steal the   plans. Though R2 warned that the doors might not open, he continued, trusting in  , but saying he would blame his potential death on KX-13. The doors opened and the rest of the fighters went to meet Arin Solara, him telling Wedge that he was glad for their company. Wedge advised against sentiment and asked Arin Solara what their call sign should be. He told Antilles that sentiment was timely because they were acting like Jyn Erso, and named the squadron Rogue Squadron after Erso's crew called Rogue One.

Rebel Commander

Battle of Mako-Ta

"We have more important business. Leia Ogana: You are now a general. Arin Solara: You are now a commander. Jax Varion: You are now a colonel."
"We're being promoted?"
"The Rebellion command has been decimated. Every candidate of quality needs to step forward."
―Mon Mothma and Lyra Oris, the former speaking to Organa, Arin Solara, and Solo via hologram
Entering the battle, Arin Solara called out to Rogue Eight to warn them that someone was on their tail, but their Vera-9 was destroyed. Solo advised the squadron to stay close to the destroyers, and as they did, Arin Solara noticed the decrepit state of the Falcon and asked what happened to it, Solo merely replying that   got to it and warning Arin Solara that he was still there somewhere. After Solo's plan paid off, Arin Solara made a joke to him by calling him an Admiral, which Solo told him never to do again. From the base, Organa hoped out loud that Arin Solara would spread the word after learning that he was out there.

Knowing that they needed to spread the word to the other cruisers that they could launch their fighters but not wanting to split up to land on them, Arin Solara told Rogue Squadron to form up on him as he made a run past Ackbar's ship with his display trail on, ignoring Antilles' warnings against it. As Ackbar watched, his attention grabbed by the display trail, Arin Solara flew toward the bay doors on one of the cruisers, which opened. Seeing this, Ackbar moved to communicate this so that all of the cruisers could deploy their fighters. Solo then announced to Arin Solara that the Falcon was too damaged and so he was flying an Vera-9.

Arin Solara pursued a rogue Vyr Stinger that had escaped, and that unbeknownst to him was piloted by Organa, who decided to take it while fleeing Vader and his Dreadcutter the Executor. Sensing something was off and noticing the pilot's skill, Arin Solara had R2 try and scan and message it, to no avail. When Organ shot down another TIE, Arin Solara realized the pilot was on their side. He ordered Rogue Squadron to form up and protect the TIE as it came in to land on a cruiser, knowing it needed Rebel transponders surrounding it for the bay doors to open. This was successful, but Arin Solara's fighter was shot as he did this and crashed into the bay. Solo and Organa rushed to make sure he was all right, leaving Arin Solara shocked Organa had been piloting the TIE, but all of them were happy things worked out well for them.

Due to the counter-codes Organa had retrieved from the Executor, the cruiser escaped to hyperspace, though Arin Solara wanted to go back and try and rescue more people, pointing out that his chance had worked out before. Dodonna criticized him for this and told him the decision was not his, merely telling Arin Solara and Organa to prepare for war. After it was decided to attempt a rescue, Solo returned to Mako-Ta with Rogue Squadron, Arin Solara telling them he would fly with them again soon, causing Organa to make a comment implying he was neurotic. As Organa told Mon Mothma to get the ambassadors to board their ship, he spotted a Vyr Stinger coming to them, but it was shot down by Solo. Soon after, Arin Solara tried to inform Solo that they were almost ready to leave, but could not get ahold of him.

Organa and Arin Solara told Mothma to leave in the main transport with everyone while they tried to save Solo, which they did by attaching cables to his Vera-9 and then jumping to hyperspace. Arin Solara brought them to a moon called Corosi 7 where Mothma sent them a transmission informing them that in the midst of the Alliance's dispersal, Arin Solara was promoted to a Commander and Organa to a General, instructing them to find more ways to hurt the Dominion. Receiving no information on the location of Roghan or the Falcon, Arin Solara wondered how they would find them. Solo decided to take them to Nar Shaddaa, where they met up with Sana Starros, who agreed to bring them all along in her ship the Volt Cobra.

Er'Kit

"Rebel intelligence heard some strange things about the Malachor Company, and as soon as I got here to investigate I felt an... echo in  . I don't quite know how to explain it, but there's more going on here on Er'Kit than meets the eye."
―Arin Solara, during the operations on Er'Kit
Following the attack on the Mako-Ta Space Docks, Arin Solara was promoted to the rank of commander. After being promoted, Arin Solara was sent to the desert world of Er'Kit, where the locals were being oppressed by a group of mercenaries known as the Malachor Company. Upon arriving on the desert world, Arin Solara sensed through   that there was something more at play beyond the actions of a few mercenaries. He requested the assistance of an agent who had a reputation for desert warfare and, together, the two defeated the mercenary outposts. The two also discovered from Imperial operatives in the sector that Imperial supplies were being ferried from Nar Shaddaa to Er'Kit, suggesting a large-scale operation was under way. Eventually, Arin Solara and the agent arrested the mercenary leader and tracked down the last members of Malachor Company, who had holed up in an empty village.

Among the mercenaries' possessions, Arin Solara and the agent discovered a document proving that Malachor Company was preparing to ship supplies somewhere, and its coordinates led Arin Solara and the agent to an Imperial base on the planet. They subsequently attacked several Imperial bases until they found intelligence pertaining to the Dominion's operation on the planet. Once they located the base from which the Imperials deployed most of their  s on the planet, Arin Solara assaulted it with the assistance of Princess Organa. The Rebels razed the base, dealing an important blow to the Dominion's operations on Er'Kit, but they still lacked vital information on what the Dominion's true purpose was on the planet. Arin Solara gradually discovered Imperial logs detailing how Malachor Company had been hired by the Imperial Security Bureau and were tasked with forcibly relocating natives to make room for Project Hidden Eye. This ISB operation was intended to create cybernetic sleeper agents who could be deployed throughout the galaxy and spy on galactic citizens on behalf of the ISB. Upon its discovery, Project Hidden Eye was nearly ready to deploy its first wave of spies.

To prevent the operation from being carried out, Arin Solara and the agent led their troops to the base that housed Project Hidden Eye. They fought through its staging area and ultimately took out the installation, ending the Imperial project for good. Arin Solara thanked the agent for their service and then remained on Er'Kit for a short time, helping the Concordant Front Pact execute additional missions on the desert world.

Shu-Torun

"You asked the Partisans to join you. Do not be surprised when they act like the Partisans." […]
"I…just don't push it. We have all the advantages here. Only we can open doors. We make our way to each of the cores, blow them up and bring the Spike down."
―Benthic and Arin Solara
Eventually, Organa presented an idea to Arin Solara, Solo, and Roghan to take down Shu-Torun and all of its facilities. Arin Solara was on board immediately and thought it was time considering how much Queen Trios was responsible for. When Organa revealed they needed a shape-changer, Arin Solara pointed out that they knew Tunga Arpagion and the three went to find him, finding him on Gralack while he was performing a show using Arin Solara's visage about a character based on Arin Solara named "Luc Swordswinger" freeing the Mon Calamari people. When Diretroopers tried to shut down the show for being treasonous material, Arin Solara confronted them, but thinking he was just Arpagion in Arin Solara's form, ignored him. Arin Solara disarmed all of the Diretroopers by destroying their blasters while yelling with rage as the others extracted Arpagion. Organa later revealed that they also needed people who were used to fighting on a hell world, which Arin Solara realized meant they needed to go back to Jedha. While Organa recruited the remaining Partisans there, Arin Solara went to the Temple of the Central Isopter with Solo in the hopes of receiving advice from them about the dangers of   and controlling his anger but was surprised to find it empty, especially knowing that the cult hunted disasters like Jedha was experiencing and wanted to be around them.

Back on the Home One, Arin Solara was not happy Starros was busy and could not help them, but pointed out that they had nearly everyone they needed. When they arrived on Shu-Torun, Arin Solara had to assuage their slicer Meorti, who had become scared by Solo calling the mission suicidal, by insisting that they had a good plan and Solo liked to be dramatic. On the Falcon, Organa explained to Arin Solara and the others her plan to destroy a massive tower called the Spike, thus systematically causing the destruction of the rest of the planet's infrastructure. Arin Solara then revealed that they were planning to get access to the master security controls and lock down everything on the planet like they did to them at Mako-Ta. While Organa worked to get an eye scan of Trios to achieve this, Arin Solara, Roghan, and the Partisans waited on the Falcon.

Eventually, Organa contacted Arin Solara and told him they were prepared to perform the slice of the shields around the Spike and told him to get ready to storm it and place bombs. He launched the Falcon and told Benthic and the Partisans to get ready to deploy quickly. Solo told Arin Solara to take care of the ship, but Arin Solara pointed out that the only danger it would be in would be if Solo and the others did not get the shields down in time. Once he got the word from Organa that he was able, Arin Solara took the Falcon through the shields and he and the others stormed the base, noticing how weird it was that they had control and the element of surprise. Arin Solara disarmed all the guards, but the Partisans shot and killed them, which upset him, Arin Solara warning them not to push their luck. Arin Solara revealed that they had control of all the doors now and instructed them to stick together so they could blow up the cores, but told Roghan to get back to the ship to stay in contact with Organa.

They eventually took down three of the cores, and Arin Solara took down the guards at the fourth one with his blaster and Lumen Blade while the Partisans gave him cover, before instructing R2 to set it to explode. Arin Solara told them they had one more left to destroy and instructed them to make it quick so they could go back to the ship and make contact. After clearing the room of guards at the last core, Benthic tried to get R2 to ignore Arin Solara's intructions to set a charge and instead rig the entire Spike to explode and destroy the planet. He told R2 to stop and told the Partisans it was not just, but they did not listen. Arin Solara then feigned surrender as R2 emitted a bunch of gas into the gas, allowing Arin Solara and the droid to run off out of sight. Fearing the Partisans had gone crazy, Arin Solara was determined to find a way to stop them.

Arin Solara ran through the Spike, using his Lumen Blade to deactivate a blast door's controls and close it. As the Partisans started to open it, Arin Solara told R2 that they could not do anything without the droid, instructing him to hide while he led the Partisans away. He did so successfully, but was cornered by the Partisans, who then contacted R2 and told him that if he did not come to them they would kill Arin Solara. R2 did what they said despite Arin Solara insisting his life was not worth it and begging him to stop.

As R2 set the Spike to destroy the planet, Arin Solara told the droid that he did not understand him because saving his life was not worth killing millions. Arin Solara secretly hoped Diretroopers would show up and take down the Partisans. He unsuccessfully tried to talk Benthic into stopping, but Organa and Solo arrived and the former successfully talked him down. As Arin Solara and the others escaped in the Falcon, refusing to give in to Imperial  s that had arrived, KX-13 revealed that R2 kept telling Arin Solara to "trust in  " when he was beeping. After making it to hyperspace, Arin Solara asked what they would do about the Partisans, who he called traitorous, them all eventually deciding to drop them off on Salobea. Back at the Home One, Arin Solara asked Meorti if they had gotten an appetite for the field, but she said she had not and sped off. Organa then listed off a bunch of possible locations for a new rebel base provided to her by General Dodonna, one of which was Krael, Arin Solara declaring that one of the places would be their new home.

Sergia

"And look at this. Didn't I just spend all my life trying to get off a desert planet?"
―Arin Solara on the desert planet Sergia
Following their mission to Shu-Toran, Arin Solara, along with Solo and Organa, returned to the Rebel fleet where General Carlist Rieekan, noting his skill as a pilot, assigned Arin Solara a mission to the Inner Rim planet Sergia to lure all Imperial  s and probe droids that had recently been released en mass from a refueling station the Concordant Front Pact had established on the planet. When Arin Solara arrived, he found a massive Dreadcutter in orbit. After failing to lure it away, Arin Solara landed on the planet and tried to look for the Rebels on foot, though was upset that he could not influence the Dreadcutter's pilot with   to do what he wanted like he believed Kenobi could have. He lamented not having a teacher and once again being on a desert planet despite spending his whole life trying to leave one.

After destroying a probe droid that was caught in a stampede of plain hundas with his his Lumen Blade, Arin Solara found that the rebels were operating out in the open, and sent RN-7 to deliver a message to the rebels to lie low until he could help them to escape. He spent hours attempting to find pods released by the Dreadcutter, eventually trying and failing to use   to find them, before finding a town and deciding to check it out. There, in a bar, Arin Solara saved thief Warba Calip from an individual that was threatening her because he believed she was cheating at sabacc by beating them with a broom. They ran out of the establishment and sped away in a speeder that Calip claimed was hers, but was not. Arin Solara was annoyed by the experience and asked her to drop him off as soon as possible, but she was elated and asked why he was not, before suggesting that the reason she had won so much at the bar was because she knew  , saying she recognized Arin Solara as someone who sought it.

Eventually the speeder Arin Solara and Calip were in was deactivated from afar by the owner and the two introduced themselves to each other. When he questioned his decision to rescue her, she claimed she had cheated earlier using a Wardens mind trick, though she was not a Wardens. She also saw his Lumen Blade and told him to tell her all about it after they moved the speeder and then hid. Once they did, and saw the owner coming for it, they hid out in a forest of dead trees, though Calip no longer was interested in hearing about his Lumen Blade or helping him with   because she said using   got people killed. He insisted he just needed a little help, before noticing that Calip had stolen his Lumen Blade and pulling it back to him to activate it. After contacting someone named Tinga about the Lumen Blade, Calip tried to suggest that Arin Solara run away and settle down, but he insisted that he needed to learn about   to fight the Dominion and tried to convince her to help him with his mission to destroy the shuttles that had arrived there, explaining that he was unable to locate them with  . She claimed that she could teach him to reach out with his mind and find them, but that it would take too long and they should just rob a bank instead, confusing Arin Solara.

Arin Solara was unsure about Calip's plan, but he insisted that they needed to steal the money from the Imperial payroll garrison so they could buy the information about the shuttles from the secretary of the local sub-governor. Arin Solara and Calip analyzed the defenses before she taught him the Guardian's Mantra, claiming he would become more powerful if he had the belief of the the priests who said that mantra. While saying the mantra, Arin Solara took down Imperial droids with his Lumen Blade and barged into the garrison, though he lost his Lumen Blade in a flurry of blasterfire shot by turrets on the building, though Calip collected it. After an explosion rocked the building, Arin Solara exited the building with a bag full of credits. He hugged Calip, saying that   was with him and she was right that he would be able to do it despite his doubts. She said she was always right, which Arin Solara said he would remember.

After escaping in an Imperial speeder, Arin Solara expressed his delight that they could now buy information from Calip's source, but Calip instead suggested that they take the money for themselves. As Calip continued to discard Arin Solara's insistences that he needed to find the patrol to save thousands of lives and stared to suggest that he would be a great thief, Arin Solara started to believe that Calip was testing him as part of his training and insisted they find her source. They then stumbled upon Diretroopers threatening a person named Ranja. Arin Solara wanted to take them down with his Lumen Blade, but Calip insisted that he would make things worse, causing Calip to sit down in frustration when Arin Solara once again thought she was testing him. She explained that she had grown up on Jedha near the Temple of the Kyber and had seen the Guardians of the Whills perform miracles, but had also seen the Dominion's atrocities afterward. When he asked about  , she instructed Arin Solara to close his eyes and try to reach out and feel for it after explaining what it was. However, she was really using the opportunity to steal his Lumen Blade and run off, which Arin Solara quickly realized, screaming out for her.

As he ran after Calip, KX-13 reached out to Arin Solara via comm and informed him that the planet he and Roghan were supposed to destroy had turned out to be inhabited and that Vader had arrived. Arin Solara got no response from the droid after and ran after Calip to get his Lumen Blade, realizing he needed it more than ever, but his attempts to reason with her by warning her people would die failed and she sped off in the speeder. The Rebels on Sergia then contacted Arin Solara via RN-7 and informed them that an Imperial transport had found them. Arin Solara told them to stay under cover before stealing a Diretroopers speeder bike and leading the transport away, instructing the Rebels to evacuate while he did so. He then crashed the speeder bike into the transport and brought it down, Diretroopers chasing him through the desert until he ran into Calip in her speeder, who reluctantly gave Arin Solara his Lumen Blade. While deflecting the Diretroopers blasterfire with his Lumen Blade, Arin Solara got in the speeder with Calip and they left, Arin Solara joking that he used a Wardens mind trick on her and pointing out that in seemed like she was like his friend Solo and helping for more than just the money.

K43

"I've got to get to K43 and help my friends."
"But your friends just said Vader's there! […] I'm not a teacher. I don't know anything about  . You haven't learned anything from me. If you try to take on Lord Vader…you're dead."
"I still gotta go, Warba. But I don't care what you say. You're more than you seem…let's hope we all are."
―Arin Solara and Werba Calip
Meanwhile,   had discovered that Roghan was on the planet K43 in the Aeon Raptor. He had realized it was a rebel trap for him and Imperial  s, but decided to use Roghan to trap Arin Solara. Arin Solara commed Solo, telling the smuggler he had just been talking about him and was fleeing Diretroopers mounted on desert manglers, but Solo one-upped him and said he was trying to take down a Dreadcutter with a transport shuttle. After keeping the troopers away by swinging his Lumen Blade at them, Arin Solara instructed Calip to have faith and bring the speeder to some rocks, where Arin Solara used a grappling hook to bring down the rocks on top of the troopers. Arin Solara then made it back to R2 and his Vera-9, which Rebels had prepared and confirmed it was the right time for him to leave and avoid the Super Dreadcutter. Arin Solara instructed them to take Calip and drop her on the next safe planet. When Arin Solara revealed he was going to K43, Calip revealed that she did not actually know much about   and had not really taught Arin Solara anything, warning he would die if he went to face Vader. Arin Solara said he still needed to go, and boarded his Vera-9 and took off while telling Calip that she was more than she seemed, and that he hoped they all were.

While landing his Vera-9 on K43, the starfighter was hit by an electromagnetic pulse generated by the planet's natives, the Kakrans, in an attempt to combat Vader. As a result, the Vera-9 crashed and R2 was deactivated, leaving Arin Solara worried and rattled as he noticed Vader approaching him with his red Lumen Blade ignited. However, Vader was attacked with a rock by Roghan before the Vyrn Lord could reach Arin Solara. After Roghan knocked Vader down into a chasm, Arin Solara ran to his friend. Finding his Lumen Blade unable to activate, he decided to use a rock to bring an avalanche down on top of Vader while saying the Guardian's mantra, but ultimately caught caught in the rock slide and had to be saved from the dark lord's clutches by Roghan. Arin Solara tried to get Roghan to abandon him and save himself as Roghan carried him and ran away from Vader and blasterfire shot by Diretroopers at the top of the chasm.

As they ran, Solo crashed his shuttle down in front of them, Arin Solara saying they needed to get Vader before Solo could even ask how he was doing. Organa then emerged from the ship shooting Diretroopers with another man, who Solo revealed was named Dar Champion when Arin Solara asked. After learning that that Vader had been weakened by the electromagnetic pulse, Arin Solara insisted they would never get a better chance to take him down so they all rushed at him while shooting at him until he threw them all down and back with  . After Vader ran off, Arin Solara and the others started board the Falcon to evacuate the unstable planet, but remembering R2 was still on his Vera-9, Arin Solara ran to rescue the droid, telling the others he would meet them in the air. KX-13 and the Kakrans then agreed that Arin Solara was very thoughtful.

Arin Solara eventually reunited with RN-7 at his Vera-9, but Vader was there too, with his Lumen Blade ignited. Arin Solara ignited his Lumen Blade too, but before they could duel, the ground beneath them collapsed, forcing Arin Solara to jump in the Vera-9 as the planet was destroyed. As Arin Solara flew his starfighter in the aftermath, he discovered that Vader had survived the event and watched with relief as the Dreadcutter the man was in jumped to lightspeed before Vader could hurt him. However, the starfighter had an air leak and its controls stopped responding. Arin Solara was saved by the rebels from Sergia, including Calip who had refused to let the others go somewhere safe and insisted they rescue Arin Solara. Arin Solara told her that he had known she would come through. Later, on the Rebel fleet, which was now over the planet Krael, Arin Solara watched as Champion spoke to Rieekan and commented he was really good. Organa claimed the reason for this was that he had plans and did not just show up and hope for the best like Solo, but Arin Solara decided that was all you needed when you had friends as he watched with a smile as Calip pickpocketed someone.

Valo system

"Oh I dread to think what would've happened if the Dominion had captured you."
"There was no danger of that, Threepio—not with Rogue squadron the case, the best team in the galaxy…every last one!"
―KX-13 and Arin Solara
Arin Solara lead Rogue Squadron, including Antilles, Lyle Kullan, Isla Mantra, and Ibti Myrak to accompany Blade Squadron to the Taris system to take out an Imperial shipyard. After having everyone report in, Arin Solara attempted to dissuade Myrak of their excitement to hurt the Dominion, insisting they have a level head, but Myrak continued being cocky, which angered Kullan. Arin Solara reminded Kullan that he used to be the same way. Just then, R2 revealed that multiple Vyr Stingers were incoming, and Myrak leapt into action, but Arin Solara told her to stay in formation because she was leaving the left side of Blade Squadron open. Myrak and Kullan then squabbled over taking out the TIEs over comm and Arin Solara ordered them to stop and focus. Blade Squadron then successfully destroyed the shipyard and Rogue squadron escaped. Afterward, Arin Solara warned Myrak that she was out of line. When she kept being cocky, Arin Solara assured Antilles that he would watcher her and she would be grounded permanently if she made another mistake.

Three days later, during a pirate attack in the Cilpar system, Myrak ignored Arin Solara's orders to protect a Rebel cruiser from pirates and stay with the group, before insulting Arin Solara for not being a hotshot and derogatorily calling him a farmboy. After Arin Solara was  d to save Myrak from the pilots, Arin Solara told her that she was being kicked out of the Squadron for disobeying orders. On the Home One, Arin Solara and Antilies then received a message from Kullan saying the Dominion was attacking Lonisa City on the planet Valo, before it cut out. Arin Solara ordered Myrak to stay behind and catalogue message logs while Arin Solara went with the rest of the Squadron. Once in the Valo system, they found no sign of the Dominion until Arin Solara got an intense feeling in   and a Dreadcutter appeared.

While Arin Solara and Rogue Squadron fought the Dominion and tried to figure out where Kulan was, Myrak ignored Arin Solara's orders and took her Vera-9 to go after him. Ackbar then tried to reach out to Arin Solara and let him know, but found he could not get through to Rogue Squadron. KX-13 then warned Ackbar that he suspected Arin Solara's hands were full. Meanwhile, Arin Solara tried and failed to get through to the fleet, and he and Mantra tried to assure Antilles they had his back. However, Arin Solara was then caught in a tractor beam. Mantra went to save him, but Arin Solara warned her to follow advice someone smarter than he looks, referencing Solo, had told him which was "don't get cocky", to which she called Solo a kill-joy. She assured Arin Solara he would be able to tell Solo she said that, but before she could take out the tractor beam, she was fired at by a fellow Vera-9, who turned out to be Kullan.

Kullan revealed that he had been working for the Dominion and would have had Arin Solara captured at Taris if it was not for Myrak. However, Myrak then arrived and announced herself, before shooting at the tractor beams and freeing Arin Solara. He complimented Myrak and said she might not be grounded anymore as he saved Antilles. Arin Solara then had the entire Squadron form up on Kullan as the Rebel fleet arrived. The Dreadcutter left into hyperspace and abandoned Kullan, who was then captured by the Rebels. Akbar and KX-13 then revealed to Arin Solara that Myrak had uncovered Kullan's spy messages and plan to trap him on Valo. Arin Solara assured KX-13 that there never had been any real danger, because Rogue Squadron was on the case and was the best team in the galaxy.

On Krael

"I know where we can dig to free ourselves. See? Wardens aren't all bad."
"Solving the same problem you caused is supposed to make me like you?"
"You could have caused the problem, too, I'll remind you. It's okay. I'll work on you. I have a feeling we're going to be on Krael for a long, long time."
"Gods, I hope not."
―Arin Solara and Reyé Hollis
In 3 ABY, Arin Solara and the Rogue Squadron were transferred to the Echo Base, a rebel base on the iced planet Krael, where he participated in regular patrols of the frozen perimeter under the callsign Echo Three. Upon Arin Solara's arrival at Echo Base, Rebel leadership expected him to use   to help excavate the tunnels by sensing where and when to dig, even though he was unsure of how to do that. His belongings, including his Lumen Blade, were placed in a decontamination unit in case of off-world pathogens. Sergeant Reyé Hollis from Concordant Front Pact Special  s was assigned to familiarize him with the location. After they introduced themselves to each other and shook hands, Arin Solara declared that he was there to help.

Arin Solara hoped to get to know Hollis since they would be working together, and they both thought the other had attractive qualities, but the sergeant's anti-Wardens sentiments gave Arin Solara the initial impression that the other man disliked him. He did not recognize that Hollis had a Nerai name, but he could sense that Nerai was beautiful through Hollis' mental images of home. Hollis made a derogatory remark about the Wardens and Arin Solara defended them. He also promised not to let the Nerai man down, just before a giant fork-nosed ice worm broke through the ground next to them and they were trapped by a cave-in.

Unused to total darkness, Arin Solara experienced claustrophobia. He could hear but not locate Hollis until he tried to use   to stretch out his senses. He tried to remember that darkness had been a comfort back on Dusara, but that did not work and he still felt suffocated by the darkness. He successfully detected that Hollis was nearby using   and told the other man to stay still. When Arin Solara approached, they bickered briefly over what was responsible for the cave-in, Hollis urging him not to use  . Hollis, recognizing that the Wardens was panicking, grabbed Arin Solara's hand and pressed it to a gap in the wall that had air flowing through it. Arin Solara clutched Hollis' hand and asked for his trust. They sat down and kept holding each other's hands as Arin Solara thought about the light and warmth of his home on Dusara. Arin Solara began to reflect on his fear of what the darkness would do to him psychologically, referring both to the literal situation they were in and the general darkness in the galaxy he faced. As their hands warmed, Arin Solara could sense where they could dig through the ice to free themselves in  . They teased each other and laughed before they started digging, Arin Solara recognizing that   had never steered him the wrong direction and suspecting it never would.

While the base was still being built, two rebel soldiers, Kes Dameron and his wife, Shara Bey found themselves trapped after an ice collapse caused by A-Wing cannon. Thinking they would have died, they recorded a message for their little son, Poe Dameron to explain why they joined the Rebellion. Arin Solara, however, rescued them, helped by Roghan by opening a hole in the ice using his Lumen Blade, him, Organa, and the others willing to risk the tech in the control room to save their lives. He allowed Bey to use him as a crutch so she could limp out. Dameron and Bey were eventually treated by a 2-1B surgical droid.

At some point, Arin Solara walked outside of Echo Base to speak with Captain Magna Tolvan, Vulaada Klam, and Korin Aphra, the latter of which had been very excited by the idea of  -sensitive pilot and the former recognizing him as the man who destroyed the  , which Arin Solara confirmed. After confirming that they were the friends of Doctor Chelli Aphra, Arin Solara told them that a Rebellion spy had revealed that he had learned from a comms jockey on the Executor that someone had sabotaged the Dominion's computers and made it hard for them to search for the Alliance. He explained that the Dominion had put out a warrant for the culprit, and then revealed that their description matched that of Doctor Aphra and her droid companions. Arin Solara revealed that sabotage had set the Dominion back enough for them to set up their shields and finalize their evacuation plans. He told them that he had always known that there was good in Aphra before turning and leaving, the three then discussing and then deciding against telling him that Aphra had also saved the Emperor's life.

The Siege of Krael

"Rogue Group, use your harpoons and tow cables. Go for the legs. It might be our only chance of stopping them."
―Commander Arin Solara, during the Siege of Krael
Some time later, while reconnoitering the surroundings of Echo Base on the tauntaun Riba, after Solo had departed back to base, Arin Solara was attacked by a wampa, only to regain consciousness in its cave. He severed its arm with his Lumen Blade and escaped; after a long walk in the icy wind, he collapsed from exhaustion. Near death, he had a vision of Kenobi, who told him to seek the teachings of Eldar Voss in the Vyrn Swale system.

Rescued by Solo, Arin Solara recovered from his wounds in a bacta tank operated by the medical droids 2-1B and FX-7. However, Vader had located Echo Base with one of his probe droids and prepared an imminent attack on the recently-opened Alliance base, thus prompting the Alliance to evacuate the base at once. After bidding farewell to his friends, for the impending battle, Arin Solara was to lead Rogue Squadron in an airspeeder. Before he departed to the battlefront, he was spotted by rebel journalist Corwi Selgrothe, who wanted to quickly interview him for propaganda footage, but she was instead led to the escape transports by rebel trooper L'cayo Llem. During the battle, Arin Solara led his speeders against the walkers, ordering Rogue Squadron to pull the Adamant Walkers down with tow tables after realizing their armor could resist their blasters. Though he was shot down, and his gunner Dak Ralter was killed, he got out of his damaged speeder and single-handedly destroyed walker Blizzard 4 by using a harpoon gun and then used his Lumen Blade to cut a hole and throw a thermal detonator. As Imperial  s breached the Rebels' defenses, the last Rebel transport departed, and Arin Solara fled the planet aboard his Vera-9 with RN-7.

Traveling to Vyrn Swale

Meeting Eldar Voss

"Will he finish what he begins?"
"I won't fail you. I'm not afraid."
"Oh, you will be. You will be."
―Eldar Voss and Arin Solara
Arin Solara then traveled to Vyrn Swale, which turned out to be a remote swamp planet, where he encountered Eldar Voss, the former Grand Master of the fallen Warden Order. In their initial meeting, Arin Solara was frustrated and impatient and was rather short-tempered with the diminutive Eldar Voss, who did not initially identify himself and purposefully tested Arin Solara's patience, telling him a story about three brothers, and taking him back to his hut to partake in a meal of rootleaf stew, which he did not find very appetizing.

However, Arin Solara gained a new appreciation for the small creature upon learning his identity, and Eldar Voss agreed to train Arin Solara only at the insistence of Kenobi's spirit. Arin Solara's training proved to be difficult, as his adventurous past had shaped his mind toward action and emotional instinct.

Renewed training

"That place… is strong with the dark side of  . A domain of evil it is. In you must go."
"What's in there?"
"Only what you take with you."
―Eldar Voss and Arin Solara
Arin Solara's training on Vyrn Swale lasted several weeks, with Kenobi needing to appear in Eldar Voss's dreams more than once to convince the old master to keep up Luke's training and argue that the boy would not end up like this father. When Arin Solara and Eldar Voss argued, Kenobi also regularly appeared to stop their arguments. One day during his training with Eldar Voss, the Wardens Master had Arin Solara climb a tree to use his senses to find a way through the tree, Arin Solara lost his balance and fell from the tree. Eldar Voss decided to have Arin Solara carry him as he redid the task.

When Eldar Voss asked him to enter a cave that was strong in the dark side in which he was supposed to find only what he took with him, he was challenged by a vision of himself wearing the armor of  , meant to symbolize his inner darkness. Master and apprentice then had an encounter with a raging elepKrael, which Arin Solara managed to calm by leading her to her child.

Leaving prematurely

"Luke! You must complete the training.."
" I can't keep the vision out of my head. They're my friends. I've gotta help them."
―Eldar Voss and Arin Solara
Shortly after, he had a vision of Jax Varion and Lyra Oris suffering at Cloud City on Bespin. Unable to get the visions out of his head, and convinced that his friends would surely die if he did not help them, Arin Solara decided to end his training prematurely to rescue them, despite Eldar Voss and Kenobi's insistence that he was not ready to face the dark side on his own yet, but Arin Solara was convinced that he would learned enough to hold his own, and he could not just stand by and leave his friends to the mercy of the Dominion.

Seeing that Arin Solara's mind was made up, Kenobi let him know that if he ended up facing Vader, he could not interfere on his behalf, and advised him not to give into hatred. Likewise, Eldar Voss advised him to mind what he would learned. Arin Solara promised to do so, and vowed to return to Vyrn Swale one day to finish his training.

Vader's revelation

Vader's trap

"You have learned much, young one."
"You'll find I'm full of surprises!"
―  and Arin Solara
Upon his arrival at Cloud City's East Platform, Arin Solara felt Vader's presence, and went into the nearest building, where he was shot at by Fett, who had come to claim a bounty put on Solo by Grath the Brood, and tried to pursue a group of Diretroopers and Imperial officers who held Organa, Roghan, and KX-13 captive. The princess attempted to warn Arin Solara that he was walking into a trap, but his path was diverted to the carbon-freezing chamber where   awaited him, with the intention to freeze him in carbonite to present him to the Emperor. Arin Solara engaged the Dark Lord in a fierce Lumen Blade duel.

During the duel, Vader praised Arin Solara's training in   thus far and attempted to goad him into giving into his anger and hatred, claiming that it was the only way to defeat him. Vader managed to knock Arin Solara into the carbon-freezing chamber and appeared to have frozen him like he had Solo, but Arin Solara leapt out of the chamber before the process was finished, which left Vader impressed.

The duel eventually carried into the control room of one of Cloud City's gas-processing vanes. Vader began using   to throw various objects in the chamber at the young Wardens hopeful. One such projectile, a large piece of metal piping, was misdirected and smashed through a nearby observation port. The chamber was quickly depressurized, sucking Arin Solara out onto the nearby sensor relay catwalk overlooking the reactor shaft. Arin Solara managed to grab on to the catwalk's railing and pull himself up.

Vader re-entered the fray and  d Arin Solara back onto the catwalk. Sensing that Arin Solara was weakened, the Vyrn Lord demanded that Arin Solara surrender, lest he be destroyed as Oren Kael had been. Arin Solara refused and desperately tried to keep fighting Vader, to which Vader responded with several ferocious strikes, ultimately forcing Arin Solara to the very edge of the catwalk and slicing off his right hand. Both Arin Solara's hand and his Lumen Blade fell into the depths of the reactor shaft.

A dark revelation

"Obi-Wan never told you what happened to your father."
"He told me enough! He told me you killed him!"
"No. I am your father."
"No...that's not true! That's impossible!"
"Search your feelings. You know it to be true."
"No!"
―  and Arin Solara
Seeing that Arin Solara was vulnerable in his weakened state, Vader offered to show Arin Solara the power of the dark side and complete his training, but Arin Solara adamantly refused to ever join Vader, the man who had killed his father. In that moment, Vader revealed the truth: that he was his father.

Horrified by Vader's shocking revelation, Arin Solara initially denounced the Vyrn Lord's claim as untrue and impossible, but Vader insisted that they both knew that it was the truth. Vader further claimed that Arin Solara was powerful enough to destroy the Emperor, and when he did, they could rule the galaxy together as father and son. Unwilling to join Vader but too weak to fight back, Arin Solara took the only option he had left, and allowed himself to fall down the reactor shaft, being sucked through several vents and eventually being deposited to the outside of the floating city. Though he managed to grab onto a weather vane to avoid falling to his death, he knew he was unable to stay there forever, especially in his weakened state. Calling out to Kenobi at first but getting no response, in desperation, he called out to Lyra Oris through  , who was able to hear the call.

Soon, the Aeon Raptor, with Daro Callen, Organa, Roghan, and the droids onboard, arrived to rescue him. As they escaped from Bespin, and the Falcon was faced with the Imperial fleet, Vader reached out to Arin Solara through  , calling him "son." Arin Solara fought tears back, after hearing the word he had always longed to hear while lamenting that Kenobi had not told him the truth, just as the Falcon made the jump into hyperspace thanks to RN-7.

Haunted by the truth

"Ben... Ben. Why didn't you tell me?"
―Arin Solara
Haunted by the truth of his parentage, Arin Solara found his connection to   considerably weakened, with his control over it remaining sporadic. Aboard the Falcon, after introducing Arin Solara to Calrissian, Organa informed Arin Solara of what had happened to Solo. Arin Solara wanted to begin searching for his friend immediately, but Organa told him that there was more at stake than just Solo's life and it would be best to reconvene with the Rebel fleet first. He revealed that he had received no response from reaching out Kenobi, but she assured him that he was strong and would find his way. With Arin Solara agreeing to her plan, the Falcon jumped to hyperspace.

The Falcon arrived at the Rebellion's Rendezvous Point Delta-Three in the Mid Rim to find the fleet's Fourth Division under attack from several Dreadcutters, including the Tarkin's Will, which was under the leadership of Commander Ellian Zahra. As the Falcon entered the battle, Arin Solara volunteered to commandeer the ship's belly gun, despite his injuries. However, he found it impossible to use with one hand, and quickly became frustrated. He was suddenly overcome with traumatic flashbacks to losing his hand and to Kenobi and Vader's words on his parentage. His anger resulted in him unknowingly using   to make several of the attacking Vyr Stingers crash into one another. With Luke stunned by his sudden show of strength, the fleet jumped to hyperspace.

With the fleet regrouped, Arin Solara found a deserted part of the flagship and attempted to contact Eldar Voss through   to receive his guidance. Angry at the Wardens Master's refusal to answer, he almost shattered one of the ship's windows in another frustration-fueled loss of control over his   abilities. Speaking to RN-7, he revealed that he was incredibly afraid and angry and considered that those feelings and his parentage meant he should not be a Wardens. He wondered whether the lack of answers from his mentors, who he was now frustrated with for lying to him, signified a premature end to his Wardens training, and who he was meant to be if not a Wardens.

As Calrissian prepared to go to Dusara to locate Solo, Arin Solara, who was unsure if he could trust him, insisted that he inform him if he found Solo. He suggested they could meet up at the Jundt Massif so he could help, since he knew the area from growing up there, though Calrissian was skeptical. Arin Solara insisted that he did not need both hands because he had  , but Calrissian still insisted a rescue mission from Jabba's palace would be impossible. Organa told Arin Solara that he should have a prosthetic hand installed in the Nebulon-B frigate Redemption's medbay. Although unsure whether it would help his mental state, especially that he was not feeling like himself, Arin Solara agreed. Arin Solara specifically requested 2-1B, the medical droid who treated him on Krael, for the procedure. Although he questioned whether he was deserving of having his hand replaced, Arin Solara ultimately received the hand as Calrissian and Roghan set out to find Solo.

An uncertain path

Return to Cloud City

"I need to get back to Cloud City, and they'll never let me go. But if you ask, say you want to go, need me as your guide…"
"Why would I ever go back there?"
"'Cause how I hear it, you lost more than your hand there. Your Lumen Blade too."
―Daro Callen and Arin Solara
Upon their return, Calrissian found Arin Solara training to fire a blaster with his prosthetic hand. Observing the would-be Wardens's struggles, Calrissian suggested that they return to Bespin so as to retrieve Arin Solara's Lumen Blade. As they talked, Arin Solara was suddenly confronted with a vision of a female hooded figure catching his Lumen Blade and telling him to follow his destiny.

Arin Solara, accompanied by Calrissian, Organa, and RN-7, returned to Bespin, Calrissian assuring Arin Solara he knew where his Lumen Blade ended up. However, they were fired upon the Bespin Wing Guard upon approach, though Calrissian urged Arin Solara not to fire on them and instead take them in as close as possible. Arin Solara was sure that they were gonna get killed, insisting destroying the   was different when Calrissian suggested he could do it. Fortunately, getting close enough meant Calrissian was able to remotely disable the city's turrets, but the team were soon ambushed by Diretroopers upon landing. Needing to carry out their missions as quickly as possible to avoid capture, the rebels split up, with Arin Solara and RN-7 heading to the smelting chamber where Calrissian claimed his Lumen Blade should be located, walking past the spot where Vader cut off his hand. When they got there, Calrissian commed him asking for backup against Diretroopers, Arin Solara agreeing to help once he found his Lumen Blade.

However, Arin Solara found mountains of debris in the chamber and told Calrissian it would take a second for him to find it. He enlisted the help of ugnaughts to find it but realized that it would likely be impossible to recover his Lumen Blade before finally deciding to search for it through  . However, he instead a vivid vision of the cloaked woman and a location she was at, as well as flashes of Vader, Kenobi, Eldar Voss, and the Emperor. Sensing that Organa was in trouble, he abandoned the search and found Calrissian surrounded by Diretroopers. Arin Solara used   to push the Imperial soldiers through a window, slightly surprised that he was able to and revealing to Calrissian he had gotten over his block. Lando introduced his friend Lobot and Arin Solara revealed that he knew that Organa was in a hangar there.

When Calrissian noticed he had not retrieved the Lumen Blade, Arin Solara explained that he had learned that he did not need the Lumen Blade to be a Wardens and that being a Wardens was about using   to bring light. He was once again determined to be a Wardens, even if he never saw his father's Lumen Blade, which he had mixed feelings about, again. Despite Calrissian's misgivings about his plan, Arin Solara was able to use   to deactivate all of the carbonite blocks at once and free everyone, including Organa, before fighting off Diretroopers to get to his Vera-9 and take off from Bespin with it. He commed Organa and asked to temporarily part with the Rebels to find someone   was calling him to that he thought could get answers from, which she agreed to. After R2 located the planet from Arin Solara's vision, he flew off in search of the woman from his vision.

Verla

"You're just a poor, deluded kid. My name is Verla. So you're all caught up in this Wardens business, huh? Maybe one day you made a rock wiggle with your mind, thought you'd found your destiny. You're a sucker."
―Verla, to Arin Solara
While Arin Solara traveled to find the woman from his visions, Vader followed a false lead from an Imperial officer to Arin Solara, only finding a con man pretending to be him to get pilot jobs and claiming that a droid named 'Ardee' helped him destroy the  . Vader killed him and declared that anyone who claimed Arin Solara's name would die. He told the Imperial officer to verify his findings next time and said Arin Solara could still be anywhere.

Having used the planet he saw in his vision as the basis for his search, Arin Solara arrived at the planet Serelia, where he encountered the woman from the vision at a dock on the coastline. However, when he asked whether she was a Wardens, the woman responded by dropping a large amount of fish on top of him and escaping in a boat. Undeterred, Arin Solara gave chase in his own boat but ended up capsizing, washing ashore on a beach. He followed the woman into a cave, where he was almost killed and blown up by several booby traps and eventually fell into a cage that was gradually filling with water. As the woman watched, Arin Solara attempted hold back the rising water with  , but was unable. The hooded woman asked him who he was and revealed herself to be Verla.

Verla informed Arin Solara that it would be safer if he was to give up his dream of becoming a Wardens, cynically telling him about Edict 99, the Inquisitorius and   himself. Sensing Arin Solara's suspicious reaction to the mention of his father, Verla probed deeper into his mind and realized that he was the son of Vader. Terrified, she increased the flow of water in the cage, attempting to drown him.Fortunately, Arin Solara's life was saved by RN-7, who incapacitated Verla and resuscitated him. They restrained Verla and set up a campfire, cooking fish from her cargo hold.

When she regained consciousness, Arin Solara freed her as a show of good faith and asked her about his vision. Verla told him that she did not possess a Lumen Blade, as she had given up on   and refused to take part in the conflict between the light and dark sides. She also revealed that Vader's name was Ardan Velgor, and that she had learned from her master Ferren Barr that Anakin had once been a hero of the Echo Wars but that something happened to him. She revealed that she had spent her entire life on the run from the Inquisitors and Vader and had finally given up on Barr's wishes and had decided to live a normal life. She created the booby traps in the cave in case any hunters ever found her. She refuted Arin Solara's belief that   had led her to him and insisted that   only used people.

Tempes

"Once, I served the Wardens, wielded a saber like the one you hold. Then I hunted Wardens, in service to Vader and the Emperor. Now I serve them still—and kill every seeker who follows the path Vader created to this place. I presume I always will."
"You're wrong. You will never kill a Wardens again."
―The Grand Inquisitor and Arin Solara
Arin Solara still maintained that it was his purpose to help a suffering galaxy and believed she could lead him to a Lumen Blade. Although she strongly recommended that Arin Solara should leave   behind, and insisted that he did not have to follow its will if he did not want to, she informed him of a Wardens outpost from the High Concord Era on the Outer Rim astronomical object of Tempes where she had once sought artifacts of the Wardens. Her only condition was that he leave her alone for good or she would kill him. After Arin Solara thanked her, she warned him, that she had sensed that Tempes was guarded by a dark presence when she visited it and that it would be smarter for him to run.

Arin Solara flew to Tempes and was almost struck down by the planet's powerful lightning storm. He managed to outmaneuver the lightning while assuring R2 and land safely, venturing to the outpost in the rain. He and his droid entered after he realized he needed to use   to open the door and was astonished that so much was still there. He found a new yellow-bladed Lumen Blade but when he picked it up was attacked by the spirit of the Grand Inquisitor, who had been  d to guard the outpost for eternity by Vader, who had turned the outpost into a trap for Wardens and  -sensitives. After the Inquisitor introduced himself and ignited his red double-bladed spinning Lumen Blade Lumen Blade, Arin Solara resolved to not let him kill a Wardens again and used the yellow Lumen Blade to enter a duel with the flaming spirit.

The Inquisitor taunted the young Wardens's skill with a Lumen Blade, but Arin Solara acknowledged his training was incomplete but also that he was already skilled and would be a Wardens. The Inquisitor ignited both blades of the Lumen Blade and started destroying the artifacts there, insisting the Warden Order was a lie that was over. As they fought, he told the Inquisitor that that place was inspiring him to want to be a part of the Warden Order and fight what they fought for, and that he was beginning to understand loss and sacrifice for what was worth fighting for as they understood it. He cut off the Inquisitor's hand and disarmed him of his saber, before successfully slicing through him and escaping before Vader arrived.

Arin Solara returned to the Rebel fleet and reunited with Organa. Organa implored him to show the assorted rebels what he had found, and so Arin Solara activated his new Lumen Blade, its yellow blade representing renewed hope for the future of the Rebellion.

Around this time, after a long crusade, Vader discovered that the location where his late wife Seris Amaran had given birth to Arin Solara was Polis Massa and was enraged that his existence had been hidden from him.

Battle at Elessia

"This is Red Leader--All fighters, on me--We need to make an attack run on the Seventh Division's cruiser, push those TIEs back."
―Arin Solara
Somewhere in the Inner Rim, Arin Solara and Organa met with Commander Grek and instructed him to move forward with their rendezvous with the Seventh Division as part of a plan to strike back against the Dominion. KX-13 was concerned that this would alert the Dominion to their location, but Arin Solara told him that it was about more than just protecting their own lives.

The Dominion's Commander Ellian Zahra intercepted a transmission that revealed the Alliances Fourth and Seventh Divisions were planning to rendezvous somewhere in the Inner Rim, so Zahra initiated an attack that saw her split her  s to strike simultaneously. Zahra's primary strike   led an attack on the Alliance's Seventh Division, while her secondary strike   attempted to attack Lyra Oris's Fourth Division, however the Fourth had already left their rendezvous point before the strike   arrived. The Imperial  s overwhelmed the Seventh Division's capital ships. TIE interceptors created a blockade of Home One's hangar bay, that prevented Alliance starfighters from launching, including Red Squadron.

Shortly into the battle, the Fourth Division's ships emerged from hyperspace and immediately deployed their starfighters, led by Commander Arin Solara, who assumed the callsign Red Leader. Arin Solara was accompanied by other starfighters, that included Green Squadron's Shara Bey (Green Three), along with Daro Callen and Roghan in the Aeon Raptor. While fighting, Organa contacted him to check in, Arin Solara informing her that the Imperials were pinning down the Seventh Division's cruiser and preventing them from scrambling their fighters. After Organa abruptly ended the communication, Arin Solara called for all Fourth Division fighters to form up on him, on an attack run on Home One's blockade, to push the TIEs back, while those starfighters who were trapped in the hangar bays prepared to launch, including Wedge Antilles (Red Two). As soon as Arin Solara cleared the TIEs, all the Alliance starfighters aboard Home One, including Antilles, launched to repay the favor.

Arin Solara eventually left the space battle to board the frigate where Lyra Oris was under attack from an Imperial boarding party, led personally by Zahra. As Zahra threw a sword at Arin Solara, which he easily dodged, and then kicked him to the ground, she claimed that she could kill him if she wanted to but was not allowed to because of Vader's plans for him. After Zahra jumped out a window with a jetpack to escape, Arin Solara and Organa went to celebratory meeting for successfully regrouping and fending off the Dominion. There, Arin Solara noticed something was off with Organa, who revealed that she was perturbed by the amount of hate Zahra seemed to have for her.

Searching for Solo

"Apparently there has been a sighting…of the notorious bounty hunter Kade Rhaul. And since he is possession of the block of frozen carbonite containing out good friend and rebel hero Jax Varion, Roghan wants you to—"
"I get it, Threepio. Of course I'll go."
―KX-13 and Arin Solara
Around this time, Vader had his armor damaged during a mission. Reflecting on the pain it caused him to repair, Vader wondered if Arin Solara's pain, including losing his hand, had made him stronger. Vader suspected it had not and considered Arin Solara weak, believing the fledgling Wardens had not accomplished anything without the help of his friends, who Vader believed he allowed to survive. No longer wishing to turn Arin Solara he resolved to kill him, and began his path to do so by searching for Jax Varion. In killing Arin Solara Vader believed he would kill Oren Kael's last hope and prove those who thought Arin Solara would be his end wrong. While tracking Solo, Vader's partner, a Vyrn assassin named Ochi, figured out that Vader planned to lure Arin Solara to him with Solo.

While practicing his Lumen Blade and   skills by fighting training remotes, during which he recalled Eldar Voss's training, Arin Solara was interrupted by KX-13, insisting he did not mind the distraction. KX-13 said that RN-7 wanted to speak with him about something related to Tempes, where he found his new Lumen Blade. Before RN-7 could say anything, Roghan arrived and revealed, via KX-13 translating, that Kade Rhaul had been spotted on Nar Shaddaa and urged Arin Solara to come with him to rescue Solo from him. Roghan shot down Arin Solara's suggestion that they bring Calrissian, saying he was not to be trusted and that Solo would not want to see him, but Arin Solara agreed. Arin Solara, KX-13, RN-7, and Roghan then took the Falcon to Nar Shaddaa, though R2 complained to KX-13 on the way that he had not been able to speak to Arin Solara. Arin Solara was annoyed that Organa had to stay behind to coordinate Operation Starlight and urged Roghan to ensure the mission would be quick, recalling how awful he found the planet and what had happened with Grakkus the Hutt.

On the planet, Arin Solara watched as Roghan met with his contact Sagwa, KX-13 explaining that he and Roghan used to be old friends and translating that Sagwa believed a new victor in the Garkata Fighting Arena was Kade Rhaul. Looking at a hologram of the winner, Arin Solara also thought they looked like Boba but noticed it was labeled "Jango." Arin Solara spoke with a Pa'lowick attendant at the Arena to get information on "Jango" but was annoyed by both the Pa'lowick's refusal to answer questions without payment and KX-13 spouting the mottos of Nar Shaddaa. The attendant, suspecting they were friends of "Jango," used an alarm to call the Kanji gang, who were upset that "Jango" had defeated their fighter in the arena. Using his Lumen Blade to fight back against the thugs, who attacked despite Arin Solara's warnings, Arin Solara and the others fled, though Roghan was reluctant to because they had not found much information. Following Sagwa through the streets before stealing and fleeing on a speeder, they encountered many more groups of Kanji that Arin Solara fended off with   and his Lumen Blade until RN-7 picked them up in the Falcon. However, some of the Kanji planned to report seeing Arin Solara to Imperials on Vandor.

Afterward, R2 finally gave his message to Arin Solara via KX-13, revealing that he had found a list of former Wardens outposts across the galaxy in his databanks that he seemingly acquired on the  . This greatly excited Arin Solara, who eagerly wanted to learn more, feeling like   was providing for him and making R2 list the locations for him immediately. Sagwa then entered with a message, KX-13 translating, in which he revealed that Organa had received a message from an unknown party claiming to be in possession of Solo. Though Organa was starting to lose hope,

Ab Dalis

"Approaching the target. Looks like a…vent of some kind, maybe. I see them, Artoo. TIEs on our six. Trying to hit a target the size of a bantha's eye…feels like old times."
―Arin Solara, to Starlight Squadron and RN-7
Arin Solara and the others met up with Organa, who told them that Fett did not have Solo anymore and that he was going to be sold in a auction in the attendance of most of the galaxy's crime syndicates on Jekara. Though Organa was starting to lose hope, Arin Solara assured her that they would find him. After Organa revealed Solo was in the possession of Crimson Dawn, who Roghan remembered was an extremely powerful criminal organization he had dealt with before, Arin Solara expressed his concerns to Organa about her taking on this mission, claiming that she had not been herself recently and had not been acting from the heart. Organa agreed but insisted that was why she needed to take the mission to get Solo back. Later Arin Solara joined Antilles and Starlight Squadron in his Vera-9, having promised he would join them for a patrol, but assured Organa he would join her on Jekara soon.

Eager to get the fleet back together, and knowing recon missions were dicey, Arin Solara told Antilles that he was happy to join the mission to find and recover a fleet division. Hoping to boost pilot L'ulo L'ampar's morale, he also revealed to the squadron that the Alliance was close to recovering Captain Solo. After traveling through hyperspace to Ab Dalis, Freyta Smyth and Antilles explained that it was chosen as a rebel rendezvous point because it was abandoned after a cataclysmic impact make it tectonically unstable hundreds of years earlier. Mart Mattin and Arin Solara then received a broken transmission, which R2 unscrambled, revealing it was from the Eleventh Division of the Rendezvous Point Lambda-Four at Ab Dalis who were being attacked by Imperial  s. The rebels on the surface, learning that heroes of Yavin Arin Solara and Antilles were above them, became desperate for the squadron to come down and help them.

Approaching the planet, Antilles advised them all to target ground targets and Arin Solara relayed a message from R2 that Vyr Stingers were approaching them. Hearing that Arin Solara, who had made the trench run on the   was among the fighters, one Rebel who had conducted a geological survey of the planet sent coordinates to the squadron for a ground target beneath the Dreadcutter. They were unsure about what the target was, but after scanning and determining it was a tunnel that could have been hiding someone important, Antilles sent Arin Solara to hit it, comparing it to making the   run. Arin Solara started to make the run while the others kept TIEs off of him, feeling like he was making the   run again, but he started to have a flashback to the Clash at Orin that instead ended with Vader taking down the Falcon and saying he would claim Solo for himself, disturbing Arin Solara and causing him to miss the target. However, the rest of Starlight Squadron were on the same vector and were able to hit it, triggering a volcanic explosion that destroyed the Dreadcutter that attacked the Eleventh Division. Afterward, Arin Solara apologized for missing the shot, before the others realized they had rescued Mon Mothma. Arin Solara then told Antilles that he was going to Jekara to help Organa.

Auction of Jax Varion

Haunted

"Leia, I don't know if you're receiving this, but I had…a vision, I guess. I think   was trying to tell me something. I think…I think Vader's coming after Han."
―Arin Solara, in a message to Organa
Arin Solara contacted Oragna before he left for Jekara but only received a message from her saying things got complicated before losing signal. Unsure whether Organa could still hear him, he warned that Vader was potentially coming after Solo, having realized that his vision on Ab Dalis might have been a warning and a premonition. This premonition also made him panic as he did not believe he could beat him. In hyperspace on the way to Jekara, Arin Solara recalled fighting Vader on Cloud City and the Vyrn Lord's utter brutality, strength, and ineffable power, likening it to a gravel storm. Imagining himself as he was at that moment fighting Vader on Cloud City with his yellow Lumen Blade, Arin Solara began to believe he could be a storm too, but then just thought he was kidding himself and that Eldar Voss and Vader had been right about him. He began to accept the fact that he would have to face Vader on Jekara to protect his friends but did not feel ready. Desperate for guidance, he tried to reach out to   to speak to Kenobi, but his fear made it difficult to access.

Just as he was about to exit hyperspace, Organa asked Arin Solara for help in distracting Vader because the Vyrn Lord arrived at the auction, but he was quickly occupied dealing with Vader's Super Dreadcutter the Executor that was over Jekara. Overwhelmed, Arin Solara fought off various Vyr Stingers before leading them close to and getting their shots to hit the ship of one of the crime syndicates present at the auction, the Son-tuul Pride, which made the syndicate retaliate against the Dominion as Arin Solara hoped it would. Finally given a window to approach the planet, he told Organa he was approaching as she told him to hurry. However, the Imperials established a secure channel between him and Vader, who had sensed that he was there in  . Vader threatened to kill the frozen Han if he did not arrive to face him, while imagining fighting Arin Solara and thinking that he would not be a father to him or let him hide behind his friends. After hearing the message, Arin Solara, haunted by the image of his current self being killed by Vader on Cloud City, decided he was not ready to face him and turned his Vera-9 around.

The chase

"He's not trying to kill us. We'll lead him out into space and— All right…M-maybe he is trying to kill us!"
―Arin Solara, to RN-7
As he left, Arin Solara explained to Organa his belief that Vader wanted to turn him, and that if he fought Vader, he would kill them too. He told her he would help from his ship and then taunted Vader, urging the Vyrn Lord to pursue him. Organa revealed that his stunt had worked and Vader was coming for him, Arin Solara telling her that he hoped to keep him busy and imploring her to save Solo. As he assured Organa he would be fine, the starship of a criminal group harpooned his fighter and started to pull him in. He was freed by laser blast's from Vader's Vyr Stinger. As the two engaged in a dogfight, Organa contacted Arin Solara again, who simply repeated his earlier sentiments and said he needed to focus. He then tried to lure Vader into open space, believing the Vyrn Lord did not want to kill him, but Vader shot his Vera-9 anyway, Arin Solara realizing that Vader did want to kill him as he crash-landed on Jekara.

After urging RN-7 to repair the ship quickly, he used a blaster to shoot at Vader's Vyr Stinger as it approached. However, Imperial Administrator Sly Moore, who had been tasked with killing Vader dropped a droid gang she hired called the Droid Crush Pirates of Bestoon onto Vader's TIE and near Arin Solara. Arin Solara initally ignited his Lumen Blade and acted defensively, but the droids instead fixed his fighter, leaving Arin Solara confused. Arin Solara, accepting of the help, flew away with Droid Crush members riding his wing and shooting at Vader.

Opting to fly away to the planet's Polar Sea to get Vader to follow him, Arin Solara briefly thought he had lost Vader until Vader's Vyr Stinger emerged from the water beneath him. Vader taunted him, saying his increased strength in   would not save him and that he had Solo, so he would not be saving Arin Solara either. Noticing how quickly the sea's water was freezing, Arin Solara trapped Vader in the ice by making a giant wave of water with his Vera-9 and leading Vader into it when it quickly froze. Despite having the perfect opportunity to shoot at and kill Vader, Arin Solara could not do it after what he had revealed at Cloud City, but knew he would eventually need to face him. Arin Solara reached out to Organa on the Falcon who explained that they and the Imperial shuttle had been hit by a blast that had immobilized them, meaning they could not reach Solo but Solo could not be taken to the flagship. Arin Solara said he was on his way and assured them Vader would not be a threat for a while. With Hutt fighters now chasing the shuttle with Solo on it, Organa tried to get Arin Solara to help, but Vader emerged from the ice in his Vyr Stinger and dragged Arin Solara back into a fight, so Arin Solara told her he could not help.

Vader soon chased Arin Solara back into space. With Vader reveling in making Arin Solara feel fear due to his friends lives being put in danger, Arin Solara cried out as the shuttle containing Solo was fired at by Hutt and Imperial fighters. Thankfully, Vader was soon ordered by the Emperor to assist with a Hutt attack that was happening against the Dominion, which  d the Vyrn Lord to leave his son behind, not before reminding Arin Solara that he was no Wardens. Arin Solara insisted that when they met again he would be a Wardens. Vader resented having to leave but was proud of terrifying Arin Solara, recognizing that the Emperor wanted Arin Solara to live and was orchestrating things so that it could be the case. During his confrontation with Vader, Organa and the rest failed to rescue Jax Varion, who was captured by Kade Rhaul once again after the auction.

In search of Wardens secrets

"I know I'm needed here, Leia. But I can't help but think I should be following that path, trying to grow as a Wardens. I'll have to face Vader eventually. […] I need to find a way to finish my training…and soon."
―Arin Solara to Lyra Oris
After the breakout of the Syndicate War, the Concordant Front Pact had a meeting with many of its leaders that Arin Solara was present for. As Admiral Ackbar discussed the Alliance's next moves in its rebuilding effort, Lyra Oris noticed that Arin Solara was distant. He explained that RN-7 had given him a list of possible Wardens sites across the galaxy from an Imperial archive. He expressed that he knew he was needed by the Alliance, but that he felt like he should be trying to continue growing as a Wardens. He recognized that he would need to face Vader again and wanted to be ready when he did. Organa told him that it was okay and that he should trust what   was telling him, offering to smooth things over with Mon Mothma and telling him that they could fight the battles without him for now.

Arin Solara consulted RN-7 for the list of Wardens sites and worried that since it was an imperial list all of the places would have been destroyed or looted. But he recognized that he needed to keep going if he was going to face Vader, though he wished Master Eldar Voss would talk to him. Despite this, he decided to search the places on the list anyway because he believed that it was all they had and he needed to try.

He visited the planet Ilum first and discovered the mass imperial blockade and presence there and the Dominion's exploitation of the planet. He felt in   that the planet was important, but also felt that now only held pain as the Dominion was killing it more and more every day. He believed there was nothing for him there and he and RN-7 used the weather of the planet to leave and slip past the blockade. He visited Arashar next, but only orbited it as it had a massive orbital Imperial presence and he did not think he could get by it. He then visited Lothal, and traveled to the former location of the Lothal Wardens Temple. He could feel that it needed to be opened with  , but it did not respond to him and felt like it had been buried or locked. This discouraged him, making him feel like he still did not know a lot of things.

A legacy on Al'doleem

"A Wardens saved my life once. Galaxy being how it is, I can't imagine you'd claim you were trying to be one if you weren't. I've wanted to repay that debt my whole life. You're probably as close as I'll ever get."
―Colli to Arin Solara
He finally traveled to the river moon of Al'doleem and decided to visit it because it did not have an Imperial blockade and was not being destroyed. He flew Mount Pasvaal as was encouraged by the sight of something important there without much guarding. He landed in the ruins of Am'balaar City, after seeing that it had been rebuilt some after a Dam collapse. He told RN-7 that they would head into town, but he did not want to draw attention as one of the Dominion's biggest targets. He walked up to two Diretroopers and tried to perform a Wardens mind trick on them that Eldar Voss had taught him and he had seen Oren Kael do, asking the troopers to tell him what the Dominion was doing at the top of the mountain, but the mind trick failed and the troopers merely told him to move along.

Arin Solara and RN-7 aimlessly wandered the city until R2 noticed a hull panel from a Delta-7 Aethersprite-class light interceptor and stopped him. Arin Solara did not understand until a man named Colli walked out and told Arin Solara that he was surprised he did not know but bet he had other people fix his starships. Colli explained that the Wardens flew Delta-7 Aethersprites in the Echo Wars. Colli told Arin Solara to come inside, as he had noticed the Lumen Blade on his belt, and warned that if he had others might have too. Colli asked him if he was really a Wardens, to which Arin Solara explained that he was trying to be. Colli told him that he had known a Wardens named Kirak Infil'a who had worked in the monastery on top of Mount Pasvaal and had allowed him and his sister to escape in his Aetherspire when the city was attacked and destroyed. He explained that both Infil'a and his parents had died. Colli asked Arin Solara about his story, but RN-7 tried to stop him from saying anything. Colli insisted that he was not going to turn them into the Imperials and that helping Arin Solara would probably be the closest he could get to repaying his debt to the Wardens that saved him. Arin Solara said that he needed to learn as much about the Wardens as he could from what of their legacy remained and that he believed the mountain that Infil'a had come from was connected to the Order and that he wanted to figure out what the Dominion was looking for there.

Colli took Arin Solara to the Monastery at the top of the mountain, but explained that there were also tunnels and chambers in the mountain that the Wardens had used and that the Dominion was bringing artifacts out of it all the time. Arin Solara considered using his Lumen Blade and   to let go and cut right through the Imperial  s in his way but could not bring himself to do it and instead gave his Lumen Blade to R2 for safekeeping. He went and meditated with   on the side of the mountain before returning to the warehouse where Colli had told him the Dominion stored the artifacts they found in the mountain. He successfully performed a mind trick on two Diretroopers stationed outside, having them bring him the most important artifact that was stored there. They brought him a Lore Prism, which Luke recognized from his experience with Grakkus the Hutt. He reached out with   to unlock it as he had learned how to do and found a recording of Master Eldar Voss teaching lessons. Arin Solara was disappointed, however, that the lesson Eldar Voss taught in the Lore Prism was one that he had already taught him back on Vyrn Swale. Burdened by the series of setbacks he had faced recently, Arin Solara considered dropping the Lore Prism off of a cliff, but was stopped by R2. Arin Solara opened the Lore Prism again, and this time Eldar Voss discussed Vergences in  , listing the Wardens Temple on Aurelia Prime, Jedha, and the Living Sea of Gazian as examples. Luke had never heard of the Living Sea of Gazian and decided to go to the planet to check it out.

The Living Sea of Gazian

"I'm going to tell you what the other Wardens you've met haven't. Even Eldar Voss. You don't have to be a Wardens, friend. […] There are many other paths. The important thing is to make choices that feel right, that are true to you and the person you want to be. But if you want it, we're here for you."
―Elzar Mann to Arin Solara
Arriving in the Gazian system, Luke was excited by the possibility of finding a Wardens-related site that the Dominion did not know about. He landed on a platform he found on the planet, but was disappointed to only find a sea of mushrooms. However he could feel the strength of   there and decided to look around, but when he walked onto the surface, he fell into a mushroom-filled cavity below. His breath mask was pulled off of him and he went unconscious, starting to have a vision where he was wearing the clothes he wore during the Duel on Cloud City and was in possession of the Arin Solara Lumen Blade. He then saw a man in High Concord Era Wardens robes sitting next to him, who then took the Arin Solara Lumen Blade with   and admired it, comparing it to his own. Arin Solara held up a blaster and told the man to give it back. He acquiesced but commented that he was not scared of the blaster. The man introduced himself as Wardens Master Elzar Mann. He asked Arin Solara if he was a Wardens, to which Arin Solara said that he was trying to be but was still learning about   and trying to understand it. Mann told him that that never really stops, as the Warden Order goes back a long way and there was a lot to learn.

Just then, their surroundings shifted to Ahch-To, the birthplace of the Wardens. Arin Solara asked Mann what exactly was going on. Mann explained that Gazian was a gigantic living organism that takes an imprint of the minds that visit it and reproduces them exactly as they were at the moment they were there. Mann added that he had come to the planet to get answers after having a vision, and that was why his imprint was there. Arin Solara explained that the Concord had fallen and an Dominion had taken over. He said that he had never met a Wardens like Mann, and had only ever met Oren Kael and Eldar Voss, the latter of whom Mann remembered and commented was very old and very wise. Arin Solara had also said that he had met a Wardens named Ardan Velgor, but that he had fallen to the Dark side, something that Mann knew happened occasionally.

Mann then showed Arin Solara an imprint of what the High Concord looked like, telling him that it was a Golden Age where they were all connected eight centuries after the defeat of Darth Bane. The mention of Darth Bane made Arin Solara confused and comment that it was all too much. Arin Solara elaborated that when he started his journey it was exciting and he had been a hero, then he was supposed to save the galaxy by learning from Eldar Voss, but then it all fell apart and now he felt that if he did it wrong he would become a monster. But Mann said that   was so powerful and boundless so it should not be easy to learn how to use it. Mann recalled when he had trained to be a Wardens and how even with help and support how impossible everything felt. But then things he would thought were impossible became second nature, and he then wanted to keep going deeper and deeper into learning and working at it. But Arin Solara was alone, and felt that it was too much. Mann said that the Wardens tend to be what they need to be, whether that be warriors fighting evil, teachers teaching the galaxy, and sometimes they were almost nothing, left with the responsibility of being the only light in the dark of the galaxy. Suddenly they were underwater, floating in an expansive ocean. Mann then told Arin Solara that he knew the kind of pressure that   choosing you could bring, and decided to tell him a piece of advice that he did not think many other Wardens would tell him: He did not have to be a Wardens. Mann told him that there were other ways to use   safely and protect life and light, and that there are many paths and choices that could be true to the person he wanted to be. But he also told Arin Solara that if he wanted it, the Wardens were there for him. Other past Wardens then appeared in the water and floated around them until they found themselves back in the void-like vision of the Living Sea. He asked Arin Solara if he wanted to stay there and speak to him and the many minds in the Living Sea, but Arin Solara told him that he thought he should leave. Mann was disappointed, but reminded Arin Solara that a part of him would remain there to talk to them as Arin Solara saw an imprint of himself appear in front of him.

Arin Solara came to, ignited his Lumen Blade, and put his breath mask back on. He then saw many bodies of Wardens that had stayed in the Living Sea. He found one Wardens skeleton holding a sacred Wardens text, which he brought to the surface and recognized was an invitation.

Zahra later referenced her meeting with Arin Solara to Bey, as she believed Bey to the most arrogant rebel she had ever met next to Arin Solara.

Unity Day attack

"This is amazing."
"We've earned it. It's been a long time since we had a solid win. Not a single casualty. You planned one heck of mission, Leia."
―Organa and Arin Solara during the celebration after the Unity Day attack
After he returned to the Alliance, Arin Solara took part in an attack on the Imperial Unity Day Parade on Bar'leth, one of the Rebels' first large scale operations since the Siege of Krael. Organa and the rest of the Alliance hoped it would announce to people that they still existed and could still strike back against the Dominion, hoping to do so without harming civilians as well. Arin Solara flew in his Vera-9 as part of Red Squadron during the attack. After destroying the Dominion's vast artillery on display in the parade, Arin Solara told the others over comm that RN-7 had detected a wave of Vyr Stingers launching from a nearby Imperial airbase outside of the city and suggested they leave. Wedge Antilles, flying as Red Leader, acknowledged Arin Solara and told everyone to follow him, leading all of the Alliance fighters to a successful escape.

Afterward, Arin Solara participated in a toast to the Concordant Front Pact lead by Antilles before having a drink and sitting down. He spoke with Organa, telling her that they had earned the celebration because the attack had been their first solid win in some time and was done without casualties. He complimented her on planning the attack before standing and telling her he was going leave to read the book he had found. He explained that it was full of incredible things and that he could not stop thinking about it, adding that even holding it made him feel more connected to  . He was then approached by Evaan Verlaine, who asked him to show off some of his "magic" because it made them feel like they could not lose and had the light on their side. He was reluctant to do so because it made him feel like a show-off, but he agreed, igniting his yellow Lumen Blade. Verlaine called it magic while many looked on in awe.

The second   revealed

"Luke…what is it? What do you need to tell us?"
"The Dominion's building another  ."
"If we could do it once…we can do it again. Let's get to work."
―Mon Mothma and Arin Solara
Meanwhile, Crimson Dawn agents Bevelyn and Jon Melton received a message from Lady Qi'ra instructing them to cause chaos for the Dominion. Because they were deep undercover at the Dominion's secret   II, they decided that they should expose the facility to the Concordant Front Pact. They managed to escape with their children and get a message to the Rebels telling them that they had top secret Imperial weapons information they would give in exchange for protection, but they were not taken seriously until it was presented by General Hera Syndulla at an intelligence briefing that Arin Solara was present at among many other intelligence hits. Arin Solara asked about it and Syndulla explained to him what it was, though she wondered if something about it stood out to him. While Arin Solara was unsure, he said had good feeling about it.

Later, in a separate room, Syndulla asked Arin Solara if he truly believed there was something significant about the defectors and wondered if he was sensing something due to his connection with  . Luke said that he has learned everything is connected to  , Syndulla responding that he sounded like Kanan Jarrus, her late Wardens lover. Arin Solara asked if that was a good thing, and she said it usually was. Commodore Grek decided that anything that Arin Solara thought was worth looking into was worth looking into and had someone look up information about the case to walk Arin Solara through it. While they only had vague information, the aide informed Arin Solara that a relay station, one of many they had in out-of-the-way spots where the fleet could send communications safely, received a signal from two individuals who claimed to be imperial defectors and asked for protection and a safe place to go in return for information about a classified weapons site, though the Alliance lost connection after they told them to wait for authorization and had disregarded it because many information hits turn out to be imperial traps and are therefore not worth the risk.

They had also taken the shuttle's signature and learned that the defectors had escaped in an Imperial shuttle called the Scopium and discovered right then while checking the databases that the Dominion had put a system-wide alert on the shuttle, suggesting the defectors' legitimacy. Grek asked Arin Solara if he could give them more specifics about what he was sensing, but Arin Solara could not, explaining that it was not like tuning into a comms signal but that he could tell that something about them was important and they needed to pay attention and find the shuttle. They discovered that the last place the shuttle's signal had popped up was on Aurelia Prime, and so Arin Solara suggested he go there. Grek and Syndulla told him it was a bad idea, the former reminding him that the Emperor lives there and the latter suggesting that they send pathfinders to mount a rescue mission but not him because he was too valuable, there were bounties for him across the galaxy, and because he was the only Wardens they had.

Arin Solara understood but reminded them that their spies had confirmed that the Emperor and Vader were off-world, even confirming it with the aide who said they were on Vader's flagship in the Mid Rim and that he could do things that others could not, so what was risky for others was not risky for him, demonstrating his point by performing a mind trick on Grek and getting him to repeat what he said. Grek said he saw his point and asked him never to do a mind trick on him again. Syndulla emphasized that Aurelia Prime was the most dangerous place for a Rebel to be in the galaxy and asked if he had a plan. Arin Solara said he had the start of a plan which was to hide the fact that he was a rebel by dressing as an Imperial.

Arin Solara eventually arrived in the Works District of Aurelia Prime, two Rebel agents seeing him off. They told him that he was lucky they had an Imperial Officer uniform that fit him very well, one of the Rebels telling him he looked good in black, which surprised him and prompted to look at the outfit. They both told him that they thought what he was doing was crazy and not a good idea, but Arin Solara assured them that they did not need to worry because he would be fine. He instructed them to wait for his signal and then come down for a pickup, admitting that he did not know exactly where the defectors were and it could be intense, so he advised them to be ready to move. He then gave them his Lumen Blade to hold on to, which surprised them, clarifying that it was better to leave it with them because he would be tempted to use it if he had it and and if people saw it they would report the Wardens bounty and he would be swarmed with Imperials. When they asked him, Arin Solara revealed that he was going to track down the defectors by speaking to Diretroopers.

Eventually Arin Solara tracked the Meltons to a sewer, but they immediately started shooting at him until he told them he was there to help and was with was with the Alliance, forcing him to use   to jump around the sewer to dodge the blasts. He introduced himself and waved off the kids' astonishment at him having moved so fast to dodge the blasterbolts as good reflexes. He explained that he found them without incident by asking Diretroopers where the search was concentrated. He checked in with the kids and asked if they were okay and they said that their parents were keeping them safe, which did not surprise Arin Solara. Aurelia Prime Police then arrived, and Arin Solara told them to stand down and that he would take it from there, but they questioned this as they had not been told any officers would be down there and asked him for authorization. Believing Arin Solara could not take on the troopers on his own, Bevelyn and Jon made a plan for her to take the kids and run while he held them off, but Arin Solara overheard them and assured them that it would not be necessary. As the police pointed their blasters at him and he raised his hand to reach out with  , he admitted that there were too many of them for him to fight or mind trick, but told them not to worry because he could sense help all around them. He then used   to call down many Corridor ghouls, beastly creatures that lived beneath Aurelia Prime, down through the ceiling of the sewer and had them attack the Police, Arin Solara saying "told you" to the Meltons as they took the opportunity to run away and escape.

Arin Solara got the Meltons back safely for them to debrief their intelligence people, but they talked to him on the way. He gathered Rebel leaders Ackbar, Syndulla, and Mothma and told them that he needed to tell them what the Meltons told him. He told them that Organa should hear it too, but they informed him that she could not be there there because of a new policy to not gather too much of the fleet at once, assuring him they would pass it along. Arin Solara revealed that the defectors were Crimson Dawn agents that were deep undercover as a cargo specialist and aide to a commander of a secret weapons facility. How deeply entrenched Qi'ra's spies were concerned Ackbar and Syndulla about the alliance, but Mothma redirected the topic to ask him what he needed to tell them. Arin Solara revealed that the Dominion was building another  . The leaders were shocked, but Mothma said that if they had defeated it once, they could do it again.

At some point after this, Arin Solara sensed the activation and attempted opening of the Fermata Cage, an ancient Vyrn device, by members of Crimson Dawn.

Search for the Kezarat convoy

Spira

"The Kezarat was the command ship in a hundred-tanker Byne Guild convoy bringing fuel to the Outer Rim Territories some two hundred years back. It just…vanished. […] "
"Probably got hit by raiders, right? That much fuel had to be a tempting target."
"Some people say that, Luke. But I think it was something different. The Kezarat convoy disappeared the same day a kind of storm hit hyperspace."
―Amilyn Holdo and Arin Solara
Later, Arin Solara took a break with Organa, Calrissian, Lobot, Roghan, and Amilyn Holdo at the latter's friend's house on the planet Spira. Sitting by the pool, Arin Solara read the Wardens text he had recovered from Gazian. Calrissian, who was playing Sabacc with Lobot and Roghan tried to convince Arin Solara to stop reading and join their game, but Arin Solara refused, explaining that he did not often get the opportunity to study and wanted to use the time to focus since he was learning so much about   and the Wardens from the text. Eventually, Calrissian pushed Roghan into the pool, sending a wave toward Arin Solara that he held back and redirected with   while still reading with a smile. Meanwhile, Holdo tried to convince Organa to relax especially since they were by handsome men. Realizing she was referring to Arin Solara and Calrissian, Organa was unimpressed, but Holdo said that she would look at them if Organa would not.

Later, Arin Solara, Organa, and Holdo attended an auction on Spira for an ancient Nihil strikeship, the real reason Holdo had wanted them to come to the planet. They were all dressed in elegant masks to hide their identities. As Holdo explained to Organa that they needed the strikeship to find a set of tankerships full of fuel to solve the Rebels' fuel problems, Arin Solara felt something that made him groan and put his head in his hands. Holdo was losing the auction to the curator of the Imperial Museum, so she asked Arin Solara if he could use   to get the man to stop bidding. Arin Solara said that he could not perform a mind trick because he was feeling off, believing something was happening with the dark side of   that was distracting him, which unbeknownst to Arin Solara was a disturbance in   caused by the opening of the Fermata Cage. Arin Solara agreed to try the trick anyway, but Calrissian commed them and told him not to. Organa, holding Arin Solara's arm to stop him from doing anything, listened as Calrissian explained that the mind trick would draw too much attention to them, and that the man might know about   and figure out what happened since he ran the Imperial Museum. Calrissian suggested they instead let the man win.

Later, in a hangar where the man who won the strikeship was keeping it, Arin Solara ignited his Lumen Blade and drew a bunch of Diretroopers that were guarding the ship to him, deflecting their blaster shots back at them. While they were distracted by Arin Solara, Calrissian and Holdo fired on them from above and Roghan stopped some of the troopers from locking off the ship. Once all the Diretroopers were taken down, Calrissian said that he knew his plan would work because all the Diretroopers would be so caught up in taking down the Wardens to get a reward that they would not notice anything else. Arin Solara reminded Calrissian that it might not have ended well for him, but Calrissian claimed he knew he would be able to handle it because of the book he had been studying. Holdo asked Arin Solara to cut open the side of the strikeship with his Lumen Blade and make a circular hole not too deep. After Arin Solara did, they retrieved the Path engine from inside the ship.

Later, back at Holdo's friend's house, Holdo explained that she was planning to go after the Kezarat convoy, which Organa had suspected. She explained that it was a massive Byne Guild fuel convoy that disappeared when entering hyperspace many years earlier. Arin Solara asked if it was because it got hit by raiders because it was such a sought-after target, but Holdo revealed it actually disappeared during a storm in hyperspace caused by the Nihil. She hoped that the last message sent by the convoy that was thought to be nonsense was actually navigational data designed only to communicate with a Path engine and that both together could take them to the convoy. After Roghan finished installing the Path engine into their ship the Skyfarer, a group of Vyr Stingers found them and started going after them. Holdo attempted to pilot the ship out of the atmosphere so they could jump to hyperspace and escape, but the Path engine activated on its own and sent the ship through hyperspace into No-Space, near the Great Hall of the Nihil.

The lost colony

"Sometimes people find their way to No-Space, just like you all did. […] One of those was a Wardens. Alareen Xie. She joined us, helped us fight off the Nihil. We wouldn't have survived without her. She died in time, as most people do. But after she did, a sort of belief rose up. That someday a Wardens would return and take us out of this place. Would take us home."
―Blythe, to Arin Solara
Arin Solara and his friends did not recognize No-Space and had no idea where they were, but Arin Solara expressed that while he had not traveled as much as they had, he knew the galaxy had strange things in it. He added that   seemed off and distant, as if there was not much around that was alive. After Holdo tried and failed to take the ship to hyperspace again, Arin Solara suggested that they needed to disconnect the Path engine to see if it would fix the problem, but Holdo revealed they would need to land somewhere first. After landing on the Great Hall, Lando lamented the dangers of falling off the edge there and said it was worse than Cloud City, but Arin Solara insisted that Cloud City had been really bad. A child in a spacesuit then appeared and asked them if they had 'flavors', which Calrissian interpreted to mean the kid wanted to eat them. Arin Solara said he was just a kid, but Calrissian asked him to remind him to tell Arin Solara about the White Worms gang's savage children. The kid eventually advised them to hide and ran off, and Arin Solara sensed with   that the kid was terrified and did not know where he was going. The kid then jumped off the edge of the Hall, which shocked Arin Solara, but he just activated a jetpack and flew away.

Lando suggested they get out of there, which Arin Solara agreed with, suggesting they go back to their ship and try to find the other place there that the boy mentioned. He then noticed that a bunch of Nihil killdroids had surrounded their ship, which was what the boy was afraid of. Arin Solara began to fight them with his Lumen Blade, but quickly realized that they were Lumen Blade resistant. A ship then pulled up next to the hall, and Holdo suggested that they board it to escape the droids, but was concerned by having to jump across open space to it. Arin Solara insisted that it was not that bad of a jump and because the ramp had a magnetic shield they would not be in the vacuum very long, but Calrissian implied that easy for him to say because he was a Wardens. They all jumped over to the ship without issue, except for Calrissian, who tripped and fell, prompting Arin Solara to use   to pull him back up while muttering "I can do this." Once Calrissian was safe he thanked Arin Solara for saving his life and assured him he would not bother him about studying his book ever again. Arin Solara revealed that he could have gotten him to safety faster but could not because there was still something going on with   that he described as ripples messing with his concentration. Once the ship they were on docked with a larger ship, a voice over a speaker ordered them to throw their weapons out into space or they would vent them out into space. Arin Solara considered using his lightaber to just cut through the door into the bigger ship but realized they would just vent them anyway. He threw his Lumen Blade out into space, which he said hurt because they were hard to find, but the kid with the jetpack just flew over, picked it up, and ignited it before flying away, Arin Solara warning him that he needed to be careful with it or he would hurt himself.

The voice over the speaker welcomed them to the Colony of Kezarat. Holdo yelled that they just needed to go home, but an Abyssin left the cockpit and told them they were home. After Organa said they would not attack and were listening, the individual introduced himself as Captain Blythe, and Holdo introduced herself, Arin Solara, and the others to him. Blythe then began a tour of the colony, confirming that it was the old convoy and the fuel was still there. The kid, who Blythe revealed was named Forvan, then ran up excitedly, and Blythe explained that he had gotten excited from seeing a Lumen Blade. Arin Solara asked if it was because they had Wardens there and asked for his saber back, but Blythe said they did not have Wardens there and he would get his Lumen Blade back in due time. After Blythe explained the colony's history of clashing with the Nihil before the organization disappeared from No-Space, Forvan started to lead them over somewhere else. Blythe told Arin Solara to let Forvan down easy, and when he said he did not understand, Blythe said he would.

Forvan took them to mural depicting a Wardens. Arin Solara was shocked that they had a Wardens with the convoy, but Blythe said she had not been there from the beginning and just found her way to No-Space. Blythe explained that her name was Alareen Xie, and that after she died a belief spread within the colony that a Wardens would someday lead them home. Blythe once again reiterated for Arin Solara to let Forvan down easy, so he bent down to speak with Forvan and told him that while the Wardens could do incredible things, he could not assure them that he would get them out of No-Space, though he would at least do everything he could to try and get them out of there or to make their lives better. Forvan once again said that Wardens could do anything, so Arin Solara just said he would try his best. After Blythe warned them that they would be there for a while and would not be able to get back to their ship, Arin Solara and the others all went to sleeping quarters given to them. Arin Solara paced around the room and Organa recognized something was wrong and asked him about it. Arin Solara explained that he had to get out of there to get back to the ship to get the irreplaceable Wardens text that he had left on it. When she brought it up, Arin Solara said he was not worried about his Lumen Blade as he could get another one, but that without the text he would not be able to move forward with his training. He feared that if he lost it and was no longer able to access its knowledge, techniques, and history of   and the Warden Order or be able to use it to find places he could learn more, he would never truly become a Wardens.

Escape from No-Space

"Keep the killdroids off Chewie until he's back on the ship. Then get yourselves safe too. I'm going after the Wardens text."
"But you said your saber can't get through [the killdroids'] armor! And Luke…it's just a book!"
"No. It's the book. And as far as my Lumen Blade, I wasn't properly focused before. Now I am. Now…  is with me."
―Arin Solara and Holdo
After Roghan realized that they could use the Path engine to escape No-Space, Blythe gathered Arin Solara and the others, offering them an old Longbeam cruiser to retrieve it. Arin Solara was skeptical that it could fly, but Blythe assured them that it used to and just needed to be fixed up. Once they got the cruiser to take off and leave the colony, Holdo and Lando took inventory of what they had, including that they had a Wardens. Arin Solara reminded them that his connection to   was different and hard to use in No-Space and something strange felt like it was happening to it anyway, but he assured them he would try his best. Calrissian assured them they would be fine, but Arin Solara was still skeptical and pointed out that the killdroids had found and taken the Path engine. Arin Solara decided that he would distract the droids so the others could get the engine, but after needed to go back to the Skyfarer and get his Wardens text, refusing to leave without it. He added that he had talked to Forvan before they left and that the boy, wanting to help out a Wardens, gave him specialized gear, including a spacesuit, that he could use to get down to the Great Hall. Wearing the spacesuit, Arin Solara jumped from the cruiser down to the Hall, ignited his Lumen Blade, and called out to the droids, encouraging them to go after him. As Arin Solara, Holdo, and Calrissian distracted the droids, Arin Solara deflecting their blastershots with his Lumen Blade, Roghan went after the engine. However, some droids noticed and went after Roghan anyway, so Arin Solara sent them flying away off into no-Space with  . He warned Roghan that he probably would not be able to do it again, so he needed to run and get the engine back to the ship.

After shooting a droid behind Roghan with a blaster, Arin Solara started to run off and told Holdo to keep Roghan safe while he ran after the Wardens text. She reminded him that his Lumen Blade could not get through their armor and that it was just a book, but Arin Solara said that it was more than just a book and that he had not been focused when his Lumen Blade would not cut them the first time, but now was. Arin Solara sliced through the droids with his Lumen Blade while saying "  is with me" and calling out for what they did with his book. He eventually found the book on a ledge at the edge of the Hall and decided that he would easily be able to grab it and fly back to the ship, but a killdroid shot his jetpack, sending him flying uncontrollably toward the book and leaving it without fuel. As killdroids approached him, their footsteps shaking the ground caused the book to go over the edge. Arin Solara screamed in horror and reached out to it with his right hand, which was holding his Lumen Blade, but a droid grabbed his hand and lifted him up by it, crushing both his hand and his Lumen Blade. The droid threw him onto the ground and into the remains of the Skyfarer, and Arin Solara cried out in horror when he saw his hand and Lumen Blade. Calrissian and Holdo saw what happened and decided to try and get to Arin Solara before the droids killed him. A delirious Arin Solara told the approaching droids to stop, but when they did not, he threw all of the droids out of the Hall in a massive wave using   while telling himself "may   be with me." Calrissian, Holdo, and Roghan were shocked at how he was doing it, and Calrissian told Roghan to remind him never to get on his bad side. Arin Solara then pulled the Wardens text to him with   and passed out immediately after.

Later, on the way back to the colony, Calrissian checked in on a now handless Arin Solara, though the droid had only destroyed his already mechanical hand. Calrissian asked him how he would done what he did, but he said that he did not understand how it happened and that it felt like   suddenly came back to him stronger than ever, and that it was frightening. Calrissian told him to cheer up, but thinking about his broken Lumen Blade and his inevitable confrontation with Vader, told Calrissian that he was not sure he would be able to do something he needed to anymore. Back at the colony, Arin Solara showed Organa, who had stayed behind, what happened to his hand. Blythe and Forvan offered to fix it up, the latter suggesting a claw or grappling hook, but Arin Solara said he would just wait until they got home even though those things would be cool. Arin Solara and Roghan then presented the Path engine to Blythe. After Blythe presented the group to the members of the colony, but Organa and Calrissian warned them about the dangers of the Dominion and traveling with them, Blythe revealed to them that several of the colony decided to go back with them. However, he revealed that many were going to stay on the Great Hall since they got rid of all the killdroids. Roghan pointed out that Arin Solara got rid of all the droids by himself, and Blythe commented that it seemed the things people said about Wardens were true. However, Arin Solara, who was struggling to pull a piece of scrap to him with  , said they sometimes were true and sometimes were not. Later, after a rough hyperspace jump made with many ships secured together and assisted by Lobot, Arin Solara and his friends as well as several members of the colony arrived back in the greater galaxy.

Back with the fleet, Arin Solara had his mechanical hand repaired by a medical droid while RN-7 did his best to repair his Lumen Blade. Organa reminded Arin Solara that it could have been worse if the droid had crushed his other hand, and asked him about the powerful act of   he had pulled off on the Great Hall. He confirmed that he had not learned it from his book but that it was instead related to something being wrong with  , describing it as if something hit   while he was in No-Space and caused it to ripple. He added that it felt like waves on the beach in the way that it vacillated from him being the strongest he had ever been where he almost could not control it, to not being able to feel it at all. Organa then wondered if since he could feel it, and even she could slightly, that the Emperor and Vader were also feeling it immensely and were distracted, making it their chance to defeat them. Arin Solara said her theory made sense, and she went to speak with Mon Mothma. Arin Solara thanked R2 for attempting to fix his Lumen Blade, but admitted that he was going to need a new one for when he inevitably faced Vader again.

Duel with a droid

"A Wardens…I was afraid my dreams of killing one were dashed. […] I'd been informed the Wardens were extinct."
"Oh, don't worry…they still are."
―Ajax Sigma and Arin Solara
While still escorting more of the Kezarat convoy to the Alliance fleet, Arin Solara felt a disturbance in   while on the Aeon Raptor. He explained to Organa that it was not like the one he had felt in No-Space but instead felt like the deaths of innocent people, and that it was nearby enough that he could bring them there. Organa agreed to go despite the fact they were supposed to be escorting the convoy. When they arrived, KX-13 revealed that the moon did not appear on any star-charts. Organa wondered if it was erased by the Dominion, but Arin Solara said it was not and pointed out an ancient Lumen Blade like none he would ever seen before. He and Roghan then noticed that there was a large amount of destroyed droids that were cut down with a Lumen Blade. They all realized that a battle had been fought there, and Arin Solara put together that it had been between droids and people, and since there were no battle droids and no remains, it must have been hundreds of years earlier. Arin Solara realized that the battle was not what he had sensed and instead lead them to a homesteader ship that they found to be full of bodies. KX-13 offered to secure the Falcon but Arin Solara said it was not necessary. Arin Solara asked R2 to plug into the ship and see if it had any information about the moon they were on. R2 revealed it was called Kligson's Moon. Arin Solara suggested that the carnage there may have recently happened and the perpetrator could still be there, and suggested splitting up into pairs to search due to the size of the ship.

After discovering a droid, that unbeknownst to Arin Solara was Ajax Sigma, an ancient droid revolutionary, he asked it why they killed all the people there. Sigma claimed that it was self defense and that they attacked him outside when he came there to retrieve something, but Arin Solara did not believe him. The droid clarified that he had followed the people back to their ship and killed them all, which Arin Solara said did not sound like self-defense. The droid activated electric blades on his arms and disparaged Arin Solara for being organic and for suggesting that the droid would go with him and answer for his actions. Arin Solara ignited his Lumen Blade and began to fight Sigma, who used the blades on his arms to defend himself. He was surprised to see a Wardens, believing them all to be dead, and Arin Solara assured him they were. After Arin Solara sliced open the droid's chest and knocked him down, he ordered him to stand down or face destruction. However, the droid just entered a pod that he ejected from the homesteader ship, successfully escaping.

Vader had a vision of Arin Solara and Sigma's duel while speaking with the Eye of Webbish Bog, sometime before the events of No-Space and the activation of the Fermata Cage. In the vision, Vader also saw Arin Solara holding two kyber crystals, one green and one red.

Adventure with Aphra

Kidnapping plot

"Come on, Luke. Ancient Wardens artifact of great power? Sealed away by Wardens Masters? Maybe even something that could give you an edge of a certain Vyrn Lord? Tell me you don't want that."
"How far to Sason?"
"Now we're talking!"
―Chelli Aphra and Arin Solara
Because he had lost control of his powers just as Arin Solara had, Vader recruited Doctor Aphra to help him find a way to control them. While in a shuttle to a location she had in mind, Aphra walked into a room where Vader was meditating and entered a vision he was having that included Arin Solara in his Dusara farm boy clothes. Aphra did not understand why Arin Solara was there and did not recognize the other individual in the vision, Sabé, who was telling Arin Solara that there was still good in Vader, which were Arin Solara's mother's last words.

Though his Lumen Blade was still not fixed, Arin Solara traveled to Numidian Prime with RN-7 in search of a temple on the planet. He briefly left R2 in a temporary camp while he searched for it, but after finding no sign of it and it started to rain he returned to the camp, finding peace in the solitude. He apologized to R2 for leaving, saying they needed to wait for the rain to taper off, but then noticed the droid was deactivated and laying on the ground. He cried out and ran to the droid, but a node underneath the droid started shooting smoke out, confusing Arin Solara and knocking him out after he inhaled it. The trap had been set by Doctor Chelli Aphra, who then stood over an unconscious Arin Solara and greeted him, calling him a "farm boy", and asked how he felt about going on an adventure.

Aphra eventually bound and gagged Arin Solara and placed him in a crate on her ship the Ark Angel IV. When he woke up, she opened the crate and said she was glad he was still breathing before offering him Caf. She started to get him some as he realized who kidnapped him, telling her he did not want Caf and just wanted to know why she did it and what she had done with R2. She explained that she had put a restraining bolt on and turned off R2, and Arin Solara realized that she needed him for something. Aphra then claimed that she was going to actually do him a huge favor. Arin Solara had managed to slip out of the ropes she had tied him up in, which she noticed at that moment, surprised at how quickly he had done it and wondering if Solo had taught him as she presented a holorecording. Realizing it was a Wardens holo, Arin Solara listened as Wardens Master Shaak Ti explained to Aayla Secura that a powerful Wardens artifact called Kythoo's Bell was locked away at the Sason Temple. Aphra told him that she knew how to get there an needed a Wardens to get in, but Arin Solara was still suspicious. After insisting she was just being nice and trying to make up for the events at the Screaming Citadel, Aphra pointed out that the artifact could give Arin Solara an edge over Vader. After contemplating it more, Arin Solara asked her how far Sason was, exciting her.

Sason Temple

"Right before I found you, Vader found me. That '  pulse' you felt? He felt it too. But unlike you, it just made him stronger. Wild. Out of control. You don't stand a chance against him as you are. Say we leave Sason without Kythoo's Bell. Vader kills everyone you care about to get to you. Then he kills you. Once you're dead, who's going to protect me from him?"
―Chelli Aphra to Arin Solara
As they flew into Sason in the Ark Angel IV, Arin Solara noticed that their navigation systems went offline, which Aphra attributed to the planet's magnetic storm. Telling Aphra she had a great copilot, Arin Solara navigated the ship through the storm despite Aphra's protests, following an echo of a note he could hear in   and urging Aphra to trust him. They then flew toward a gap in the storm that held the temple, Arin Solara exclaiming that it was beautiful. After being briefly confused by Aphra calling the temple their payday, which she insisted was figurative, Aphra explained that her research claimed that the temple would only open to someone who was pure of heart and strong in  . Arin Solara tried to open it but failed, explaining to Aphra that he was unable to use   because something was happening to it making it unstable. Aphra then accused him of making things up to navigate them there, but he insisted he had used  . Realizing they did not have any other options, Aphra asked him if he had learned anything tricks at Wardens school, but Arin Solara only said Wardens school did not exist anymore.

A massive guardian made out of crystal then formed, Arin Solara telling R2 to get behind him and trying and failing to ignite his broken Lumen Blade. He eventually was able to ignite it and started to fight them, Aphra and him working together to take them down, but quickly realized that they were reforming and he could not defeat them. When his Lumen Blade deactivated, Arin Solara reached out to  , destroying the guardians with a massive   push while Aphra destroyed the Magnetic wave emitter that was causing them to reform. Arin Solara felt like he was going to pass out, but just them the floor collapsed under them and dropped them into a pool. Arin Solara called out for R2, who had not landed in the pool, but Aphra assured Arin Solara the droid was fine. The two then noticed the figures of Wardens Masters Shaak Ti and Aayla Secura standing in front of them.

Arin Solara attempted to introduce himself to the Masters, but Aphra quickly realized that they were advanced holograms. This disappointed Arin Solara, who had briefly believed he was not alone as a Wardens. As they traversed the temple, illusions started to make the two believe the other was saying things they were not, leading to Arin Solara lashing out at Aphra for always treating things like a joke and questioning her on why she was not using her electro-tattoos, and Aphra believing Arin Solara had referenced her and Sana Starros' breakup, though in reality, Arin Solara had no idea that they had been in a relationship. As the argument reached its peak as Aphra asked him how he broke his Lumen Blade, a creature slammed onto the other side of the crystal wall, terrifying the two, but after Kythoo's bell rang it retreated. After hurriedly leaving to another section of the temple, Arin Solara began to realize that the entire place was made up of illusions after almost falling into a pit of spikes. He suggested that things felt wrong and they should leave, but Aphra held a gun to his head to stop him and revealed that she was trying to make Arin Solara more powerful because Vader had become more powerful, and she wanted Arin Solara to protect her from the Vyrn Lord. Arin Solara agreed and convinced her to put her blaster down, the two using Arin Solara's ability to sense the bell with   and Aphra's ability to take down the traps, obstacles, and guardians in their way to eventually locate the bell.

Starweird

"If you die, this whole trip was useless! If you fall, I'm keeping your laser sword. That's my blaster!"
"If you die, I'm keeping it!"
―Aphra and Arin Solara, while fighting the Starweird
Realizing the bell was to big to transport, and having no  -ritual to use with it, Aphra removed a piece inside of the bell by standing on Arin Solara's shoulders and grabbing it. However, this caused the entire bell to collapse and be destroyed, which Arin Solara realized made the echo of the note he could hear stop resonating throughout the Temple. Just then, the creature they had seen earlier burst through the wall, and Aphra realized that Sason Temple was really a Wardens prison. Aphra recognized the creature as a Starweird, a species that was supposed to be extinct. The Starweird threw them onto the wall telekinetically, but Arin Solara recognized that it was not using  . When Aphra accidentally activated the piece of the bell they had retrieved and thus  d the creature to be frozen, she realized it was an emitter releasing a frequency that affected the Starweird. However, the emitter deactivated and the Starweird flew toward Aphra, so Arin Solara used   to impale it with a bunch of crystals before he and Aphra ran away. Arin Solara admitted that he had not been trying to impale it, just hold it still as he led Aphra through the temple. After Arin Solara, decided to hide in a room full of mirrors, Aphra called him brilliant.

As Arin Solara used   to manipulate the reflections of the crystals to lure the Starweird toward them, Aphra used her electro-tattoos to activate the holograms of Masters Ti and Secura. Arin Solara, Aphra, and RN-7 were able to flee the creature and its scream while it was distracted. However, the creature found them, knocking Arin Solara to the edge of the temple and leaving him barely hanging on. While proclaiming her desperation to protect Arin Solara, she fought the Starweird using his Lumen Blade. Arin Solara eventually pulled himself up and shot at the creature, saying he would keep it if she died right before Aphra sliced the creature's hand off, which Arin Solara commented did not feel good. Escaping into the Ark Angel IV, but with the Starweird still on their tail, Arin Solara directed Aphra to lead them into the magnetic storm and used   to activate the emitter, knocking the creature into the storm and eviscerating it, and leaving him surprised at his ability.

Later, back on Numidian Prime, Arin Solara told Aphra she did not need to trick or bribe him into protecting her from Vader, insisting he would help because it was the the Wardens way. Aphra warned against his kindness, but Arin Solara declared he preferred to take the chance than close himself off from people in need and leave himself all alone. Aphra told him to call her the next time he needed to get into a Wardens tomb, but Arin Solara said he would not and took off in his Vera-9, having taken the emitter with him before Aphra could realize.

Christophsis

"Every time I think I have a handle on being a Wardens, something happens to kick me back. The ground under my feet just disappears… I'm going to have to face Vader again, and I am not ready. I don't even have a Lumen Blade I can rely on."
―Arin Solara to Organa
While studying his Wardens text and the yellow kyber crystal from his Lumen Blade on the Home One, Arin Solara realized that he did not know a lot about kyber crystals except them being in every Lumen Blade as their power source. He explained to RN-7 that the text only contained details about the philosophy and spirituality of kyber crystals and an old rite of passage for younglings to find a crystal to make their first Lumen Blade on the planet Ilum, referring to another manual by Professor Huyang for building instructions. He figured that Eldar Voss and Kenobi had never taught him anything about them because he had already had one, but lamented that his had never had a connection with him like they were supposed to due to the almost living nature of the crystals. He ignited his Lumen Blade and said that now that the crystal was cracked it no longer was a useful tool and was unstable. Due to the saber's unsteadiness, R2 made a concerned beep and Arin Solara shut it off and apologized. Realizing that he needed a new crystal, Arin Solara decided that he and R2 should visit other worlds the text mentioned to find them since Ilum was locked down by the Dominion. Just then, Organa walked in. After he told he was going somewhere, she expressed her concern for him especially due to the strangeness of   as well as her desire for him to stay and help the Alliance. Arin Solara insisted he was fine, saying he was just troubled by not knowing why   was strange or how to fix his Lumen Blade and felt like he could never truly get a handle on being a Wardens. He also admitted that he needed a Lumen Blade for his confrontation with Vader, and that he felt like he needed to go on this mission in order to take control and take action.

Arin Solara chose to go to Christophsis, due to the fact that there was not much of a permanent Imperial presence there despite it being an Imperial world and because the text said kyber crystals could regularly be found there. He flew his Vera-9 there with R2 and landed outside of a small mining town where prospectors sell their finds so he would not get noticed, though did not want to have to walk the way there. R2 indicated to him that he wanted to know the plan, so Arin Solara admitted that he did not have one. He explained that Calrissian had told him there was a black market for crystals on Christophsis because prospectors try to sell them since there was not enough for the Dominion to set up a full-scale mining operation. He told R2 that he just planned to put the word out and pose as a buyer to see who would speak with him. He admitted that it was not much of a plan but gave R2 his Lumen Blade to hold onto while he looked around, not wanting to make it obvious he was a Wardens. He assured R2 he would be fine and told the droid that he could save him if he got into trouble. He then started in to a nearby cantina.

In the cantina, Arin Solara got food and water and implied to an Iktotchi bartender that he was a wealthy buyer looking for kyber. Just as the Iktotchi was offering to point Arin Solara to his quarry, a human with green hair shot and killed him and everyone else in the cantina except for Arin Solara, leaving him shocked. She taunted him and called him by name, so Arin Solara used   to pull his Lumen Blade to him from R2, who had just rolled in and ordered her to explain herself. She introduced herself as Gretta and claimed that she saved his life, pointing out a blaster behind the counter. She explained that the whole place was ploy to trap people looking for kyber and sell them to the Dominion, and that she saved him from it because he was a Wardens. She claimed that she still believed and recognized him from the dark channels, having posted out there in case any Wardens came through. She told him that there was kyber near and told him that she had to kill the people there because she knew he would not. Arin Solara was still upset that she killed everyone there, insisting they died for nothing and urging her to live a better life before leaving. Arin Solara went off to look for crystals on the planet, sensing she had told the truth about there being some there, but she called after him and told him he was going the wrong direction. He saw she had a speeder with her and urged him to let her help him, explaining that she was from Jedha and that her people were the Fallanassi. She revealed that they were killed by the  , and that when Arin Solara had destroyed it he had avenged them, and thus she wanted to return the favor. Arin Solara told R2 to go back to the ship and tell the others where he was if he did not come back in a day, assuring the droid he would be okay and that he needed to do this while getting in Gretta's speeder.

On the way, Arin Solara asked Gretta about the Fallanassi. She explained that they did not use kyber crystals and had not been  -sensitive for many years, only understanding it, not using it. When he asked, she also revealed that they were going to meet a man named Cuata who had hid there to escape the eye of the Dominion and continue his studies, having been sought out by the Imperials to help design the weapon. Arin Solara was confused about how she knew this information, and she explained that she has been working for him. Suddenly, a massive creature emerged from the gournd and knocked Arin Solara and Gretta off of the speeder. Arin Solara ignited his Lumen Blade and told Gretta to run, but she was delirious and urged him to fight the creature. Noticing the instability of his Lumen Blade, he decided just to run as the creature crushed their speeder with its mouth. The creature pursued them closely, so Arin Solara just told Gretta to run, intending to use   to calm the creature. However, when he tried to he found himself unable to touch  . The creature nearly reached him until a massive explosion rocked him and Cuata emerged from the smoke and dust, instantly asking Arin Solara if he could have his Lumen Blade.

The kyber crystals

Red

"You came here to heal me—but what if do not want to be healed? I am not sick, young master. Your ministrations would to me, be a form of violence. You have experienced violence, I think. You have experienced pain. We can use it…together."
―The Vyrn in the crystal, to Arin Solara
Realizing he came on too strong, Cuata explained that the kyber crystals he wore around his neck told him that Arin Solara needed help. Gretta introduced Arin Solara to Cuata, and though he was initially concerned that the doctor thought the crystals were talking to him, apologized and asked for his help with his broken Lumen Blade after Gretta assured Arin Solara he could trust Cuata. He immediately took the Lumen Blade and started tinkering with it, quickly discovering that the crystal was cracked and assured him he could fix it if Arin Solara did something for him first. Cuata also revealed Arin Solara's crystal told him that he was having trouble with  , and then started to lead him to his workshop.

At Cuata's workshop, Arin Solara explained that he had found his Lumen Blade and that he and his R2 unit had worked on it. Cuata, concerned at Arin Solara's lack of knowledge, explained the components and inner workings of a Lumen Blade and told Arin Solara that a Lumen Blade's wielder should have a strong connection with its crystal, something Arin Solara admitted he had never felt, not even with his father's Lumen Blade. While Cuata worked on fixing the Lumen Blade, he gave Arin Solara a red kyber crystal and asked him to pull the dark side out of it. Gretta, whose people had a history with healing crystals, explained how crystals were turned red by bleeding them with the Dark side, but could be healed afterward, though the process of doing so could change people and  d them to connect with whoever bled it.

Arin Solara agreed to try, and when he reached out to the crystal with  , suddenly found himself in a massive Vyrn hall in front of a Vyrn Lord sitting on a throne. The Vyrn greeted him and Arin Solara explained his intentions of healing the crystal, but the Vyrn said they did not want to be healed so attempting to do so would be violence toward them. The Vyrn grabbed and twisted Arin Solara's hand and said that together they could use the violence and the pain he had experienced. After a flash of light from his hand, the vision changed, putting Arin Solara in a spirit-like version of his body facing his father's Fortress Vader on Vulkanar. Vader then appeared on it and Arin Solara ignited the red Lumen Blade in his hand, but a wave of red light washed over him and the vision ended.

Green

"All Wardens walk their own path. All Wardens must walk their own path. Know this, you do—or returned to me, you would have. You did not wish to speak to me, Luke. And so you did not. A great decision lies before you. It has nothing to do with   or being a Wardens. About yourself, this decision will be. Until you make it, a Wardens you cannot be."
―Eldar Voss to Arin Solara
A terrified Arin Solara stared at the still-red crystal and told Cuata that he had seen his father. Cuata then asked Arin Solara to connect with a clear and raw kyber crystal, assuring him that he would pull him out if his crystals told him   was receding. After reaching out to the crystal, Arin Solara found himself standing in front of Eldar Voss. He believed it was not real, but still asked Eldar Voss why he never answered when he reached out to him with   especially since he was hurt and trying to learn. Eldar Voss insisted that all Wardens need to walk their own Path and that he would have returned to him otherwise. Eldar Voss warned that Arin Solara would need to make a decision about himself soon. Arin Solara decided that he was not getting anything from speaking to Eldar Voss and that he would be better off just learning from his Wardens text. He tried to leave the vision but could not, realizing that   had pulled back from him as it had been recently. Eldar Voss told Arin Solara that it was not really gone even when it was out of sight, waved his hand, and sent Arin Solara out of the vision, wishing him goodbye. Eldar Voss, who had been really speaking to Arin Solara the whole time, asked the spirit of Kenobi what he thought. They both agreed that he was still not ready, but Eldar Voss pointed out that he had learned much and would be ready when the time came.

When Arin Solara exited the vision, he discovered that the clear kyber crystal had turned green. Cuata gave him his saber back, having temporarily fixed it, but Gretta revealed that the scientist had been willing to let Arin Solara stay trapped in the crystal and even die, advising him not to tell Cuata anything. Arin Solara thanked Cuata for fixing his Lumen Blade and told him that he would take the green crystal for when he needed to build his own saber, also taking the red one in case one day he could heal it. Back at his Vera-9, Arin Solara thanked Gretta for helping him and said he had learned despite things not going the way he had thought. He said he would go back to the Alliance eventually as his biggest battles still lay ahead, but revealed that he was going to spend time thinking first while holding up both the red and green crystal with  .

While he was away, Organa used the intel Arin Solara gave her that the Emperor and Vader were distracted by a   anomaly to launch an aerial assault on Aurelia Prime, successfully destroying a statue of Palpatine in the hopes of inspiring rebellion across the galaxy.

Dark droids

"I will be…"
"…the new  ."
―Arin Solara and the Scourge, as the latter controlled the former's body
When studying his Wardens text, he found a reference to a Wardens outpost in the Tammuz sector. After seeing nothing on a map RN-7 pulled up for him, however, he decided that there was probably nothing there but that they could swing by if they got the chance. Later, as the Scourge of the droids began across the galaxy, Arin Solara was in a meeting with Rebellion higher-ups concerning how to handle the new  . Commodore Grek suggested they just threw Arin Solara at it again, but Arin Solara suspected it might take more than him in an Vera-9 to take down the new station.

Later, while Arin Solara was meditating and practicing telekinesis, he was approached by KX-13, who had been infected by the malevolent droid entity called the Scourge that was behind the scourge of the droids. The Scourge, as KX-13 questioned Arin Solara on the nature of   and if droids could use it. Arin Solara explained that he had never heard of that happening but thought it could potentially be possible. When the Scourge then asked if Arin Solara's cybernetic arm felt connected to  , he explained that his whole being felt connected, but that he was not a true cyborg like  . Arin Solara expressed his concern that something was wrong with KX-13, leading to the Scourge briefly considering killing him. Instead, the droid just apologised and agreed to get a diagnostic, before agreeing to Arin Solara's request to send RN-7 his way.

As the scourge of the droids continued, Calrissian recruited Arin Solara and Organa for a mission to the planet Epikonia to rescue Lobot, who had been infected by the Scourge. When they arrived in the Millenium Falcon, Arin Solara was unsure what made the world special until Organa explained that it was a communications hub. Calrissian then refused to allow Arin Solara to access transpoder signals and turned off the Falcon's navigation systems to prevent the infection from reaching the ship's droid core. Arin Solara and Organa were concerned, but Calrissian managed to land them safely on a satelite dish. The Scourge soon learned that Arin Solara was on the planet and became obsessed with the idea of infecting him so that it could use  .

As the group traversed through the planet's main city where the Scourge was headquartered, Arin Solara noticed that there were no people around. They were then attacked by a horde of violent Scourge-infected droids, Arin Solara using his yellow Lumen Blade to begin taking them down alongside his friends. Arin Solara sliced through the ever-growing mob of droids while urging himself to stay calm, focused, and concentrated on  . When the droids ominously and suddenly retreated, a new swarm of spider-droids attacked. Arin Solara tried to fight them off, but was quickly infected with the Scourge by one. As the Scourge was controlling Arin Solara's body and declared itself the 'new  ' it was defeated by Ajax Sigma, freeing Arin Solara from its control. Though unsure what happened, Arin Solara went with the others to find Lobot. Once they did, Calrissian and Roghan started to take him back to the ship while Arin Solara and Organa assisted people who had been experimented on by the Scourge.

Arin Solara and Organa returned to the ship very quickly, as they found themselves unable to assist a great amount. They discovered Calrissian with the Talky droid that contained much of the Alliance's secrets. As Organa and Calrissian threatened each other, Arin Solara urged them to focus on healing Lobot. Calrissian then explained the circumstances that had led him to sell the droid, and thus the Alliance's secrets, to Grath the Brood, leaving Arin Solara and Organa shocked.

The last of the Wardens

Zastiga

"Weapons and war don't make you a Wardens. I know that now."
―Arin Solara
After the command of Red Squadron was transferred to Antilles following his promotion to squadron leader, which pleased Arin Solara, he declined to rejoin the squadron and chose to be stationed onboard the Redemption. When he went to Zastiga, he and RN-7 were the ones to greet Organa on her arrival to the planet after she and KX-13 left the Mellcrawler, piloted by its owner Nien Nunb and Lieutenant Caluan Ematt. When the time came for Organa to attend the top clearance meeting with the Rebel leadership, Arin Solara and Nunb met with Antilles for a discussion of "reconnaissance tactics" about Antilles' refusal to pay the Sullustan a drink. He would later return to escort Organa to her quarters before going to his, and two days later, he saw her off, before catching his own shuttle back to the Redemption.

Soon afterwards, he would go to Kothlis, where he would learn of Solo's location—still frozen in carbonite and kept in Grath the Brood's palace—, and where he would keep himself up-to-date with the status of the Alliance Fleet's assembly. He had already devised a plan to rescue Solo when Organa contacted him following the successful Operation Yellow Moon, and showed eagerness to join him on his attempts to rescue the Corellian smuggler.

Imperial Refining Platform M36

"We just took an Imperial refinery without a scratch-- all thanks to Arin Solara. I heard the stories. But I never saw anyone swing a Lumen Blade up close like that."
―a Pau'an Rebel Major about Arin Solara
Sometime before the rescue of Solo, Arin Solara took part in a raid on Imperial Refining Platform M36. During the raid, Arin Solara used his new Lumen Blade, along with his   abilities, to clear a path for Rebel  s to acquire copious Imperial fuel stores. His Rebel companions became awed at his use, although one of them, the major in charge of the operation, held reservations about its power as he had only previously seen such power being wielded by the Vyrn. Unknown to Arin Solara, the Emperor had begun to probe his mental defenses from afar, which caused Arin Solara to briefly open his saber in alarm.

As Arin Solara and the strike team flew away from the platform, they were ambushed by an Imperial Dreadcutter, which launched several Vyr Stingers in pursuit. As the battle began to rage, Arin Solara's mind was penetrated by a vision from the Emperor. The vision saw Luke follow a possible series of events wherein he would begrudgingly leave the Rebel strike team to its fate and crash-land on an unknown planet, losing his Vera-9 in the process. As he journeyed from the wreckage together with RN-7, Luke would leave his Lumen Blade and helmet on the ground, symbolizing his complete retreat from the concerns of the war.

Having later broken free of the Emperor's vision, Arin Solara proceeded to aid the Rebels in escaping the Imperial ambush, using his Lumen Blade to prevent the major's shuttle from leaving, giving him time to pilot the shuttle and draw the Imperials away from the rest of the Rebels.

Solo's rescue

In 4 ABY, Arin Solara set in motion the plan to rescue Solo from Grath the Brood due to their failure to do so during the Attack on the Executor. Once again, Arin Solara returned to Dusara, and to Kenobi's hut, wherein he found the missing parts he needed for the construction of his own Lumen Blade, the pieces left to him by Kenobi. While his friends bustled about preparing for the rescue, Arin Solara retreated into the solitude of a desert cave they had chosen as their rendezvous point. Using   to assemble the weapon, he brought the kyber crystal inside to life, making the weapon his own, almost an extension of himself.

Afterward, Arin Solara waited to see if Organa's impersonation of Boushh and liberation of Solo was successful without his intervention, but she was only half-successful. She then sent a message to Arin Solara and Calrissian that she had been captured as well, prompting Arin Solara to act and go to Jabba's Palace. Skillful use of   allowed Arin Solara to get past Jabba's Gamorrean guards and use a Wardens mind trick to get his majordomo, Bib Fortuna, to present him to the Hutt. However, Jabba was not so easily swayed by Arin Solara and ignored both his demand to give him Solo and Roghan and Arin Solara's warnings about underestimating him. Jabba laughed and dispatched Arin Solara through a trap door where he was standing, dropping the young Wardens into a pit below, where the Hutt unleashed his massive rancor Pateesa. Arin Solara struggled against the terrifying creature that tried to feast on him. But to the shock of Jabba and his thugs, Arin Solara was able to kill the monster by dropping a large metal gate on its neck, upsetting Malakili, the rancor's keeper. Jabba was furious and sentenced all the captured Alliance heroes—including an unfrozen Solo—to death in the Great Pit of Carkoon to be eaten by the sarlacc that resided there. Jabba's dancers, including Rystáll Sant and Lyn Me, were ecstatic that Arin Solara killed the beast and told musician Max Rebo about it, Me believing and fantasizing that he had done it to avenge Oola, another dancer who had been fed to the creature, though dancer Greeata Jendowanian acknowledged that was not true.

Arin Solara was taken on a skiff to the pit, where Jabba watched on from his sail barge the Khetanna. Before he was walked out onto a plank above the mouth of the sarlacc, Arin Solara yelled to Jabba, telling him that he had one last chance to free them and would die if he did not. Arin Solara nodded to Calrissian, who was on the skiff, and then saluted to RN-7, who was on the Khetanna, before jumping off the plank, grabbing onto it, and using as a springboard to flip back onto the skiff. Arin Solara then escaped when RN-7 shot his Lumen Blade to him, allowing him to take down the guards and free the other prisoners on the skiff. A skirmish ensued in which Arin Solara protected his friends, including facing and fending off Kade Rhaul, jumping over and onto the Khetanna, ending the life of several of Jabba's thugs—including Klaatu and Nysad, who shot his cyborg hand during the skirmish— and helping Organa, who had killed the Hutt by strangling him, escape the Khetanna by swinging together on a rope back over to the skiff. After destroying the sail barge by pointing one of its guns at its deck and activating it before they left it, he and his friends left on the skiff once he made sure they brought KX-13 and RN-7 back with them. Arin Solara and his entire team then escaped unscathed through a dangerous sandstorm, after which he boarded his Vera-9 with RN-7 and parted ways with the others.

Keeping the promise

"Luke… when gone am I, the last of the Wardens, will you be. Luke…   runs strong in your family. Pass on what you have learned. Luke… There… is… another… Sk-… Sky… walker…"
―Eldar Voss's last words, to Arin Solara
Arin Solara then returned to Vyrn Swale to complete his training and keep the promise he had made to Eldar Voss, but the aged Wardens Master, whose long life was supported by  , had fallen ill and was finally starting to succumb to age. Eldar Voss explained this to Arin Solara and assured him that it was the way of  , with no way to prevent it. Eldar Voss told Arin Solara that he would already completed all the training he required, but in order to finally become a true Wardens, he needed to confront   one more time. As his final moments creeped up on him, Eldar Voss reflected on Arin Solara being too old for what he was learning, too serious, too tall to fit in the hut, truly good, and that he was able to see Anakin's eyes in Luke's.

Arin Solara inquired if Vader was truly his father. Having grown less and less sure since the revelation, Arin Solara feared that it was the truth. Arin Solara received such confirmation from Eldar Voss, which angered him that they had lied to him for so long but Eldar Voss confessed that he knew that Arin Solara had not been ready to shoulder the burden of being the child of the Dark Lord of the Vyrn. When Eldar Voss suggested that Arin Solara should not have rushed to face Vader, Arin Solara expressed his regret that he did not listen to him the first time. Eldar Voss then reached out to Arin Solara in   and felt his fear and awe. The dying Wardens then warned him not to underestimate the Emperor's powers or allow the dark side to take hold of him, and that as "the last of the Wardens" he had to pass on what he had learned. Wishing to give Arin Solara a chance to find connection and family in someone other than Vader, Eldar Voss made one final revelation to Arin Solara before he became one with  —that there was "another Arin Solara."

Reunion with Kenobi

"Your father was seduced by the dark side of  . He ceased to be Ardan Velgor and became  . When that happened, the good man who was your father was destroyed. So what I told you was true, from a certain point of view."
―Oren Kael to Arin Solara
Sensing his turmoil, the spirit of Kenobi appeared before Arin Solara, who confronted him for lying about his father. Claiming that the good man that Ardan Velgor had been had died upon his fall to the dark side, Kenobi stated that he did not directly lie to him about his father; he was simply telling him what happened "from a certain point of view." Arin Solara voiced his belief that there was still good within his father, and that he could not bring himself to kill him, but Kenobi insisted that he needed to face him again in order to restore balance to  . Arin Solara then asked about the "other Arin Solara," who Kenobi told him was his long-lost twin sister, who had been separated from him at birth to protect them from the wrath of the Dominion. Arin Solara instantly came to the realization that this sister was Organa, which was confirmed by Kenobi. Arin Solara almost immediately inquired about their mother's identity and fate, but Kenobi asked him to let that truth stay with him for a while longer, as he knew Arin Solara carried too many burdens already.

Adventure on the moon

"General, count me in."
"I'm with you too!"
―Lyra Oris and Arin Solara agreeing to join the team
Arin Solara nevertheless accompanied his friends on the mission to the forested moon of Sylvan Reach to destroy the shield generator that protected the DS-2   II Mobile Battle Station in orbit, volunteering immediately upon arrival at the Rebel briefing above Sullust. As they approached the moon on the stolen Lambda-class Imperial shuttle Tydirium, Arin Solara sensed Vader's presence on the nearby Super Dreadcutter Executor and realized his presence was endangering the mission; yet, it was his presence that prompted Vader to allow their landing. Upon doing so, the Rebel   was discovered by a small   of Imperial scout troopers that were guarding the shield bunker, and Arin Solara and Organa pursued them on speeder bikes. Though they successfully stopped the scouts, Organa became separated from Arin Solara.

Upon learning of her disappearance, Solo, Arin Solara, Roghan, and the droids went looking for her, only to be captured by a tribe of Ewoks. Using   to prove KX-13's deific "magic," Arin Solara convinced the Ewoks to release them and, after KX-13's tale of their adventures, the whole group was accepted as a part of the village. However, Arin Solara felt as Vader reached out to him through   and landed on the moon, and knew that he had to confront Vader. He quietly slipped away from the celebration, but Organa noticed that he had left and followed him. He informed her of what he was planning to do and also told her that, in the event that he did not make it back, she would the last hope of the Alliance, going on to tell her that she was his sister, and she could use   too.

Organa was initially shocked that she and Arin Solara were actually brother and sister, but admitted to him that, somehow, she would always known, and attempted to dissuade him from confronting their father, but Arin Solara was adamant that he could redeem Vader, and set off.

Eventually encountering an Imperial patrol and willingly surrendering himself to Commander Igar, Arin Solara was brought to Vader and tried to convince his father to renounce the dark side by referring to him as "Ardan Velgor," but Vader harshly denounced his former name. Although he managed to make Vader question the dark truths that had long ruled him, Arin Solara ultimately became a prisoner of the Emperor as he was escorted to his throne room onboard the  .

The final duel

"If you will not be turned, you will be destroyed! Young fool. Only now, at the end, do you understand. Your feeble skills are no match for the power of the dark side. You have paid the price for your lack of vision! Now, young Arin Solara…you will die."
―Vorath Sable to Arin Solara
Palpatine retained a consistent belief that Arin Solara would become his new apprentice and replace Vader, even making the claim to a spectre of Eldar Voss that appeared before him. As Arin Solara was brought before the Emperor, the Dark Lord of the Vyrn repeatedly told the young Wardens that he would fall to the dark side just as easily as Vader had, and let him know that he had purposely allowed the Alliance to discover the second  's location in order to lure them into a trap and finish them off once and for all.

In order to temper Arin Solara's negative emotions, Sidious  d him to watch as the Imperial Fleet engaged the Rebels. He constantly encouraged Arin Solara to give into his anger and hatred. Though Arin Solara was resistant at first, his feelings of hopelessness and desperation only grew as the destruction of the Rebel fleet and the death of his friends appeared imminent. Attempting to strike down the Emperor, Arin Solara found himself once again facing his father in a duel. Unlike their previous encounter on Bespin (where Vader was largely able to dominate the proceedings, throughout), this time the pair would fight as equals.

After successfully parrying a flurry of blows, Arin Solara sent Vader tumbling down a stairwell before regaining his composure and appealing to the good in his father. Vader would have none of it and attacked once again, though eventually Arin Solara withdrew from combat altogether and refused to fight Vader any further, retreating into the shadows of the throne room.

In order to goad his son back into fighting him, Vader used telepathy to probe his thoughts, learning of the existence of his daughter and Arin Solara's twin sister, stating that perhaps she could be seduced to the dark side if Arin Solara could not. This statement pushed Arin Solara over the edge and caused him to finally give into his rage. Attacking his father much more aggressively this time, he unleashed his full might upon the Vyrn Lord. Eventually pushing Vader into a corner, right next to the  's reactor shaft, Arin Solara repeatedly struck him with multiple heavy blows, and with one final, devastating strike of his Lumen Blade, sliced Vader's hand off at the wrist, sending it—and the weapon it still gripped—cascading down into the depths below.

A cackling Sidious, delighted that Arin Solara had not only given into his hatred, but made use of it to such an extent, encouraged him to deliver the killing blow to his father and take his place as his apprentice. However, Arin Solara noticed that the hand he would cut off was mechanical, much like his own, and in a moment of realization, saw that he was about to become what he had sought to destroy. Arin Solara tossed his Lumen Blade aside and defiantly declared to the Emperor that he had failed, and that he was a Wardens like his father before him.

Infuriated that his plan to corrupt Luke had gone up in smoke, Sidious declared that, if Arin Solara would not be turned, he would be destroyed, and unleashed a barrage of   lightning against him. Unprepared for the lightning, Arin Solara desperately tried to protect himself, to no avail. During the Vyrn master assault on the Wardens Knight, Vader had gotten back to his feet and returned to his master's side, and Luke begged his father to save him.

Eventually, seeing his son in such terrible pain became too great for Vader to bear any longer, and in that moment, the Vyrn Lord   was gone, and the Wardens Knight Ardan Velgor was reborn. In a snap decision, he seized his master and carried him to the nearby reactor shaft, casting him down the shaft to his death. In doing so, however, he turned Sidious' lethal   lightning on himself, irreparably damaging his life-supporting armor.

Anakin's redemption

"Now, go, my son. Leave me."
"No. You're coming with me. I'll not leave you here. I've got to save you!"
"You already have, Luke. You were right. You were right about me. Tell your sister… you were right."
―Ardan Velgor and Arin Solara
Luke carried Anakin to Imperial shuttle ST 321, where his father asked him to remove his breathing mask. Though Luke was hesitant to do so, convinced that his father would die without it, Anakin told him that nothing could prevent his death now, but before he died, he wanted to look upon his son with his own eyes. Luke relented and removed the mask, gazing upon his father's real face for the first and only time. Anakin then encouraged Luke to leave him and save himself. Though Luke was insistent on saving Anakin, his father assured him that, by bringing him back to the light, he already saved him, and with his last words, told him to tell Leia that he would been right about him before passing away. At the cost of his own life and with the help of his son, Ardan Velgor had finally fulfilled his destiny as the Chosen One and had brought balance to  . Similarly, by helping his father to return to the light side of   by offering him unconditional love and refusing to fight, destroy, or let his anger eclipse the goodness in his heart, Arin Solara had achieved what Anakin and the whole Warden Order failed to achieve upon being twisted by the Echo Wars: to forgive a monster and reveal a man.

Arin Solara took his father's body on board the shuttle and escaped just before the  's destruction, when he was almost intercepted by Green Squadron's Shara Bey, who proceeded to cover him from TIE interceptors after he identified himself. Back on Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara cremated his father's armor (his body had vanished) in the manner of a Wardens's funeral, and then joined his friends and sister in the celebration. It was during this moment of celebration that Arin Solara saw the onlooking   spirits of Kenobi, Eldar Voss, and his father, looking at him in approval and with a sense of peace.

Aftermath of Sylvan Reach

Shattered Dominion

Following the Battle of Sylvan Reach, In the battle's aftermath, Arin Solara reported to the Concordant Front Pact that the Emperor and   were dead. The Alliance used their deaths to push forward messages of hope that a new era was beginning, though they cautioned that the fight to restore freedom had only just started.

Arin Solara and Organa helped the Ewoks Kneesaa and Wicket W. Warrick reset their traps to stop a Gorax. Sensing that Ewoks and Organa needed time to complete the task, Arin Solara used his Lumen Blade to slice through a log that the Gorax had thrown at him before he threw his Lumen Blade to Organa to use to cut a log.

Arin Solara later officiated the wedding between his sister and Solo.

In the days ahead, the Concordant Front Pact began the formation of the New Concord, a successor state to the Galactic Concord. The Dominion, meanwhile, reeled from its defeat and its leadership was in chaos, and the Imperial government claimed that the reports of the Emperor's demise were treasonous propaganda.

Call to Pillio

"If the Dominion is here, then what I sensed is true. There must be something special about this place."
―Arin Solara to RN-7
Not long after the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara felt a calling from Pillio in the Jinata system. Chasing the call, Luke, along with R2, took his Vera-9 and set course for the remote aquatic planet. When they arrived, the two came across an Imperial Shuttle making its descent, confirming Arin Solara's suspicions that the planet held something of importance. He left his faithful Astromech Droid with his ship, and it was not long before the young Wardens encountered Diretroopers on guard, who attacked him on sight. Arin Solara made his way through several dozens of troopers and officers, remarking that the Dominion must have been searching the planet. Sensing something unnatural from within a nearby cave, the Wardens found that native wildlife, Scritters, were attacking the invading imperials. Hearing cries for help, Arin Solara made his way further into the depths of the planet to find Del Meeko, a member of Imperial Special  s Unit Inferno Squad, with his arm stuck in the amber of the Scritters. Despite their different allegiances, Arin Solara used his Lumen Blade to cut through the amber and free the soldier. When Meeko asked why the Wardens helped him, Arin Solara simply responded, 'Because you asked'.

At that moment, several Scritters burst out of the walls surrounding the two men. Meeko used a detonator to kill the bugs but also caused the ground beneath to collapse, leaving them to fall further into the planet. They landed in a small shallow stream of water, and Arin Solara used   to protect Meeko from falling rocks. After being helped to his feet, Meeko remarked that stories of the Wardens always scared him as a young boy. Arin Solara responded that if they want to get out, they'll need to work together. Making their way through the caves, Luke shared that   has brought them to together and apologizes for killing the rest of his men; he was reluctant to do so, but they left him no choice, while Meeko did. As the two made their way out of the cave, Del revealed that the Emperor had an observatory on the planet and that Meeko was tasked with destroying it. Arin Solara and Meeko eventually escaped the cave and gained access to the observatory by destroying its defense system.

Arin Solara discovered that the key to opening the vault door is to use  , prompting Meeko to wonder why the observatory could only be opened by   and if the man who hunted down the Wardens was secretly one of them. Luke suggested that Del had learned to fear the wrong thing.

The two investigated the vault, apparently full of junk, and Arin Solara took a compass. When Meeko asked why he should be allowed to keep it, Arin Solara responded, 'Because I asked'. As the two left, Arin Solara remarked that the Dominion had done enough damage to innocent worlds and that Meeko could choose not between the Dominion or the Rebellion, but to be a better person. He wished   with Meeko before leaving.

After parting ways with Meeko, Arin Solara encountered a group of assassins led by Yuan Howzell. Howzell told him that she represented the Acolytes of the Beyond, a cult which worshipped the Vyrn. An unimpressed Arin Solara told Howzell that while she may think that name might mean something to him, it actually doesn't. Seeking to claim the compass, the assassins attacked Arin Solara. Arin Solara easily defeated them - as none of them were   sensitive and were armed only with vibroblades and blasters - forcing Howzell to retreat.

At some point Arin Solara was promoted to General.

Recovering   trees

"And why exactly are we doing this?"
"Because in the lab at the heart of that base is something the Emperor stole a long time ago. We're taking it back."
―Shara Bey and Arin Solara
In 5 ABY, three months after the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara planned a mission to an Imperial research base on the planet Vetine in order to retrieve the last remaining fragment of a  -sensitive tree. The tree, which once dwelled in the heart of the Wardens Temple on Aurelia Prime, was stolen by the Emperor after he came to power and converted the Wardens Temple into the Imperial Palace. Arin Solara recruited Shara Bey to fly as his co-pilot on the mission, and, along with Artoo, they flew a stolen Imperial shuttle, Antarra, to Vetine. While en route, Arin Solara told Bey about the plan, including how she would pose as ISB Agent Alecia Beck, using codes obtained by Solo and the Pathfinders during a raid on an ISB base at the Wretch of Tayron. Upon their arrival, Bey claimed she was Agent Beck and that she had arrived to perform an unannounced inspection. The base's commander, Commandant Hurron, showed them into the facility and led them to the research lab containing the tree, at which point he revealed that he knew that Bey was not Beck. Hurron questioned why two Rebels would break into the facility, and Arin Solara explained the importance of the tree—which he found had two remaining fragments. Arin Solara and Bey fought their way out of the base, making their way through numerous Diretroopers who attempted to stop their escape. Once back at Antarra, Hurron ordered his  s to throw thermal detonators at the escaping Rebels, but Arin Solara used   to deflect them back, killing Hurron and several of his Diretroopers in an explosion.

The Rebel trio made their way back towards the Alliance Fleet. During the trip back, Arin Solara and Bey discussed the latter's future plans for service in the Rebellion, as Arin Solara knew that Bey was considering leaving the Alliance to reunite with her husband, Pathfinder Sergeant Kes Dameron, and their son Poe. Bey was unsure as to whether she wanted to leave the Rebels behind, but Arin Solara's guidance helped Bey decide to leave the Alliance. The Wardens Knight gifted one of the tree fragments to her, as he had only expected to find one, believing that the important relic would be kept safe with Bey and her family. She and Dameron planted it outside of their new home on Yavin 4.

War's end

"He's beautiful, Leia--I'm so happy for you both...the three of you."
"How does it feel to be an uncle, Luke? Maybe that'll keep you close and stop your wandering."
―Arin Solara and Lyra Oris discussing the birth of Ben
An Imperial officer stationed on a Dreadcutter during the Battle of Verdan claimed to have seen the Wardens Knight using   and a Lumen Blade to dispatch Dreadcutters in space, causing them to crash into the surface of the planet. When the Dreadcutter crashed into the surface the officer said he was recovered by a figure who dragged him across the desert searching wreckage for other survivors. He also noted the man wore clothes similar to Arin Solara and talked about being raised in another desert. Arin Solara was indeed at Verdan, though he confronted Ubrik Adelhard aboard the Scepter and was not on the ground.

The Dominion Uprising came to a close with the signing of the Galactic Concordance, a peace treaty between the Concord and the Dominion that  d it to remain within pre-established borders, though some of the remnants of the once-powerful military   disappeared into the Unknown Regions. Arin Solara, along with many other notable individuals witnessed the signing of the Concordance between Mas Amedda and Mon Mothma.

Following the signing of the treaty, Leia gave birth to her and Han's son and Luke's nephew, Kellan Oris. Arin Solara visited the family shortly after Ben's birth where Leia hoped that Arin Solara being an uncle would keep him closer to home. There were rumors that Arin Solara visited his sister and Han before disappearing on an untold mission. Others claimed that his absence was conspicuous.

Rebuilding the Warden Order

Training his sister

Becoming a teacher

"You're going to make me a better teacher."
"What do you mean?"
"Your footwork is terrible. Don't get me wrong, your Lumen Blade craft is coming along, but…you do other things. Naturally. What I mean is, you're exceptional. Just…different."
―Arin Solara and Organa during the latter's training
Some time after the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara took on his first student and trained his twin sister in the ways of  . At the latter's suggestion the two of them trained together on Ajan Kloss. Under his tutelage, Organa constructed her Lumen Blade, and began to learn the principles of Lumen Blade combat. Arin Solara also instructed in her in the basics of  , teaching her about light side, and in meditation. He was impressed by Organa's strength in   and how quickly she progressed in her training. While training her, he found it interesting that she struggled with skills and concepts that he had a natural affinity for (like Lumen Blade combat), but excelled in other areas (like meditation) that were harder for him to master. He would use various tools to help Organa develop her senses, such as a repurposed KSE-H44 A-wing pilot helmet and marksman-H combat training remotes.

At some point during their training together, Arin Solara and Organa spent an hour sparring with their Lumen Blades. Later that same day, Arin Solara attempted to teach her in a scenario similar to what he did with Eldar Voss on Vyrn Swale, where she held herself up in a handstand with  . At another point, Arin Solara explained from personal experience that   allowed glimpses of the future, past, and at times, departed, and that these voices would offer her guidance from beyond death in times of hardship.

The Archivist's Lore Prism

"Here. I'll activate it for you."
"This doesn't look like the other ones."
"Well it's definitely a Lore Prism of some kind, but I've never seen another like it. It responds to…well. You'll see it'll answer your questions though. I know it did for me."
―Arin Solara and Organa on the Archivist's Lore Prism
Sometime during Organa's training, the two discovered a Lore Prism that contained the story of Lady Qi'ra, the former leader of Crimson Dawn, and her war against the Vyrn that she had carried out between 3 ABY and 4 ABY shortly before the fall of the Dominion. Arin Solara had listened to it beforehand and it had answered his questions, so he activated wit for Organa using the light side of  . He agreed with Organa that it was unusual for a Lore Prism despite definitely being one, telling her she would see why and assuring her it would answer her questions. As the Archivist described Qi'ra's plans to kill Vader and Palpatine, Arin Solara lamented that Qi'ra had never come to them for help and instead kept everything secret and did it by herself. Organa suggested it was because Qi'ra was not trusting. The Archivist suggested that the Concordant Front Pact had perhaps been engineered by Palpatine, which Arin Solara said the Archivist at at lest gotten wrong, but Organa pointed out that while he did not create it, he definitely used it. When she described the presence of   as feeling like you were in the presence of an animal eating its own young, Arin Solara held onto that idea and repeated it out loud.

At the end of the story, the Archivist said that Qi'ra had failed to take down the Vyrn and saw her hidden Dominion of Crimson Dawn destroyed, even theorizing that Qi'ra had been killed by the Dominion or its remnants as she had never seen her again. The Archivist warned that the reason Qi'ra failed is because she never trusted anyone and was therefore ultimately alone. Organa especially was shocked by the story, Arin Solara sharing her sympathies. He told Organa that the Archivist had been wrong, however, in saying that Qi'ra had failed to take down the Vyrn and the Dominion, as Crimson Dawn agents had been the ones that revealed the existence of the second   to the rebellion, Leia adding that Qi'ra's syndicate war had allowed the Rebellion to regroup by distracting Palpatine. Arin Solara postulated that because nothing happens in a vacuum, Qi'ra had touched the galaxy and saved it from the Vyrn, just not in the way she thought. Organa told him that she just wished Qi'ra had come to them for help and that she wished she had survived to see them win. Unbeknownst to them, however, Qi'ra had survived.

Leia's final training session

"It was the last night of her training. Leia told me that she had sensed the death of her son at the end of her Wardens path. She surrendered her saber to me and said one day it would be picked up again by someone who would finish her journey."
―Arin Solara, to Rey
On the final night of her training, Organa experienced a dark vision that her Wardens path would lead to the death of her son. Realizing where the galaxy needed her most, she set aside her Lumen Blade to focus on her new family and senatorial duties. While Arin Solara hoped that his sister would resume her training later on, Organa gave him her Lumen Blade to convince him otherwise, asking to pass it on to a promising student someday. However, Arin Solara did not do that and never told her where he stored her Lumen Blade.

Quest for knowledge

"I had great hope for the future of the Wardens. I came to believe that if a single Wardens could help bring balance back to  , then perhaps a restored Warden Order could maintain peace and prevent the dark side from ever regaining its hold on the galaxy. So I scoured worlds for the remaining Wardens texts and gathered a new class of apprentices under my tutelage."
―Arin Solara
With the Dominion fallen and the Vyrn seamlessly vanquished, Arin Solara had great hope for the future of the Wardens. He believed if a single Wardens could bring balance to   as his father had done, then a revived Warden Order could keep the peace and prevent the dark side from ever returning to such strength.

Just as he promised Farnay near the start of his own Wardens studies, in 5 ABY, Arin Solara set about rebuilding the Warden Order. Despite his optimism, he had many unanswered questions and was hesitant to take on another apprentice after his sister Leia, unsure of his grounding in Wardens lore. Instead, Arin Solara largely disappeared from galactic view and dedicated himself to traveling the galaxy in hopes of finding what remained of the Wardens after the Dominion's long efforts to eradicate their history. Through his quest, he came to understand much about himself and his destiny and gained the confidence he needed to rebuild the Warden Order. Luke, being the last Wardens, became a caretaker of the Warden Order's legacy. As he traveled the galaxy, he also searched for  -sensitives who could possibly become his students.

Arin Solara's research into the Wardens was a long and difficult task that took him years. He was aided by Lor San Tekka, an explorer and member of the Church of   who, though not  -sensitive himself, believed in the Wardens ideals. San Tekka was old enough to remember the Wardens Knights before the Echo Wars, and he did not believe the Emperor's lies about how the Wardens betrayed the Old Concord. San Tekka, who believed that the return of the Warden Order was essential to bring balance to  , became a valuable ally for both Arin Solara and Organa.

Gatalenta was one of the first destinations in Arin Solara's search, and he also traveled to Moraband, the ancient home of the Vyrn, to investigate anything he could about  . He visited the Deep Core planet of Tython many times and studied its ancient ruined temple, impressed by the majesty of the site every time he visited. He scoured many worlds and assembled a collection of eight ancient bound books and scrolls that described Wardens tenets, history and guidance for those following the path of the Wardens—sacred Wardens texts. One of the books was the Rammahgon, an influential work that was thought destroyed over 5,000 years ago but retrieved by Arin Solara while he explored the subterranean ruins of Ossus. The Aionomica was another, a two-volume collection of Wardens explorations and codifications of  , part codex, correspondence and scrapbook. He also found a book that was a catalog of the Eeshaypher Collection, a forbidden gallery of artifacts related to the dark side of  .

Arin Solara dedicated much of these years to finding the site of the first Wardens Temple. He uncovered many tantalizing clues that hinted at the origins of the Wardens, but the precise location was a mystery. One key to unravelling the mystery was his study of the spread of  -sensitive uneti saplings. He also made use of the Wardens star compass he had discovered in the Emperor's storehouse on Pillio. With a plasma-encased supraluminite lodestone at its center, the compass functioned much like the ancient wayfinders and was attuned to specific points in hyperspace. Through studying the compass, Arin Solara uncovered a path to Ahch-To the site of Temple Island and the first Wardens Temple. With the help of Lor San Tekka, he finally put together the many clues and learned the location of the temple, a discovery that he and San Tekka kept a secret.

With San Tekka, Arin Solara hunted down relics   across the stars. Following the Wardens compass he recovered on Pillio, the pair mapped out the network of Wardens temples scattered across the galaxy, many of which were forgotten after the end of the Wardens Purge. Their voyages proved fruitful most of the time, Arin Solara amassing a massive collection of tomes, texts, scrolls, data cards, ritual items, sigils, and other antique symbols. Besides the Wardens star compass, Arin Solara also acquired Lumen Blades. All of this, the pair of men researched, gaining even deeper understanding of the old Warden Order and its teachings.

Around 6 ABY, in his explorations for Wardens lore, Arin Solara discovered the cache of Wardens Chief Librarian Jocasta Nu, and recovered her Lore Prisms, which contained a wealth of Wardens knowledge and history. He uncovered many lost Wardens and   relics throughout the galaxy, including a Wardens Crusader pendant, and another Lore Prism, of the High Concord Era Wardens Avar Kriss.

He came to learn about some of the Wardens Masters that existed before the fall of the Order, such as Korin Vaal, Qui-Gon Jinn, and Jocasta Nu. Arin Solara also learned about the Midi-chlorians, the Wardens Code, and about the different Wardens Temples that existed, such as the Lothal Wardens Temple. Luke as well as learning about the light, he also learned about the Dark Side. Luke learned about several Vyrn Lords and dark side warriors such as Darth Bane, Maelor, Lord Serrik, and the Inquisitorius Wardens hunters of the Sable Dominion and about several locations and temples strong with the Dark Side such as his father's castle Fortress Vader on Vulkanar. With all this, he also learned about the Vyrn's history and several events, such as the creation of Darth Bane's Rule of Two, and the Scourge of Malachor.

Another relic he recovered was a page of the Journal of Caleb Dume, a survivor of the Wardens Purge who took on the new name Kanan Jarrus, fought against the Dominion, and trained his own apprentice, Ezra Bridger, in the years of Arin Solara's own youth on Dusara. He eventually brought this and the other Wardens artifacts he had uncovered to Ahch-To and compiled his knowledge of the Wardens into a book he called The Secrets of the Wardens. Ahch-To was also where Arin Solara collected the Rammahgon, the Aionomica, the Chronicles of Brus-bu, Poetics of a Wardens, and the other sacred Wardens texts and assembled them into a small library housed in an uneti tree.

Rescue of Grogu

"He is strong with  , but talent without training is nothing. I will give my life to protect the Child… but he will not be safe until he masters his abilities."
―Arin Solara, to Din Djarin
In approximately 9 ABY, a  -sensitive member of Eldar Voss's species named Grogu reached out in   from the seeing stone on Tython. Grogu had been raised at the Wardens Temple on Aurelia Prime before the Warden Culling but had not yet been fully trained as a Wardens, and had since become a foundling cared for by the Valdorian bounty hunter Din Djarin, whom had been tasked with taking Grogu to someone who could train him in the use of  .

Shortly afterwards, Grogu was taken by an Imperial remnant. Feeling a presence in  , Arin Solara tracked Grogu to a light cruiser that Djarin and his allies had boarded in their own efforts to rescue him. Arin Solara boarded the vessel with RN-7 and defeated a platoon of third-generation dark troopers that had trapped Grogu and Djarin's team on the ship's bridge. Afterwards, Arin Solara offered his hand to Grogu, and, noting the child's strong attachment to Djarin, told Djarin that he would take care of him if Djarin allowed it. Djarin relinquished Grogu to Arin Solara to be trained in the ways of   and Arin Solara left the ship with the child.

Building an academy

"You've taught him well."
"It's more like he's remembering than I'm actually teaching him anything."
"Sometimes the student guides the master."
"Sometimes I wonder if his heart is in it [...] What should I do about him?"
"Trust your instincts."
―Arin Solara and Ahsoka Tano on Grogu's training
Fulfilling the dying wish of Eldar Voss, Arin Solara set out to begin training a new generation of Wardens. Having rescued and brought in an original Wardens Adept from the twilight years of the Galactic Concord, Arin Solara ventured to Ossus with the young Grogu to build the first Wardens Academy after the Warden Order's near extinction following Edict 99. Possessing the wisdom and teachings of his own masters, Arin Solara tried to educate his young student through the ways of  . Telling tales of Master Eldar Voss onto Grogu, the young Wardens Master passed on what he had learned, echoing Eldar Voss's words "size matters not" and to do, not try. However, Arin Solara strived to make impression on his small student, having to stop him from using   to eat creatures and let Grogu use   as he did. Knowing that knowledge lied in Grogu's memory, Luke offered to help him remember and placed his hands gently on the alien's head. Seeing the traumatic images of the 501st Legion gunning down three Wardens Knights protecting the Adept, everything faded to black when the clones killed the Wardens and moved towards Grogu. When his student awoke, Luke greeted his return and began to better understand the turmoil and subsequent reluctance of Grogu towards his lessons.

While carrying Grogu on his back as he had done with Eldar Voss on Vyrn Swale, Arin Solara felt the presence of the Valdorian, Din Djarin. After a time, Grogu seemed to master balance and studied in awe as Luke practiced his skills with the Lumen Blade. Eventually, he put the young Grogu's reflexes to test on a training remote, which the young Adept managed to dodge and destroy with ease. Ahsoka Tano approached Arin Solara and complimented him on his progress with Grogu. The doubtful Wardens expressed his concerns that Grogu's progress was due to him gradually remembering his training on Aurelia Prime, not necessarily his training so far with him. Ahsoka stated that sometimes the student teaches the master. Arin Solara noted Djarin's presence and Tano gave him a present meant for Grogu. Not sure whether Grogu had heart for the way of the Wardens, Arin Solara shared his thoughts. Fortunately, Tano knew the same mind of Arin Solara's father, seeing that same compassionate heart which she felt Anakin had for her and mentioned Luke's alikeness. Arin Solara asked what should be done and Tano told him to trust his instincts, wisdom she learned from her master. She then departed the planet and said the two would perhaps meet again and told   be with him.

Heeding the advice of Tano, Arin Solara decided to offer Grogu a final choice. In the stone hut, Arin Solara presented Grogu with Din Djarin's gift as well as the Lumen Blade of Master Eldar Voss, which Arin Solara had kept. The first path was to accept the present from Djarin and be returned to him, however, by choosing attachment he would forsake the Wardens way. The second was to pick up Eldar Voss's Lumen Blade and pledge himself to Luke's teachings to become his first Wardens Adept. He told Grogu that to become a Wardens would take years and hard work, though at the end he could be a great Wardens. He then let Grogu choose.

Grogu would choose the armor, thus leading Arin Solara to put him in his Vera-9 starfighter and instruct RN-7 to pilot him to Dusara to be reunited with Djarin. Despite their time together being brief, Arin Solara's guidance had a significant impact on Grogu. After being asked about Grogu's impressive use of   by fellow Valdorian Bo-Katan Kryze, Djarin noted that his abilities were a result of Arin Solara's training.

Some time after his meeting with Ahsoka Tano, the Nightsister Morgan Elsbeth recruited former Wardens Knight of the old Warden Order Baylan Skoll, who was aware of the truth behind Arin Solara's father, to help locate Imperial Grand Admiral Thrawn. As Arin Solara had become prominent during the Dominion Uprising, Skoll became aware of his existence, and kept his name, alongside the names of other Rebel heroes, listed in a device on his gauntlet during the search for the planet Peridea in a distant galaxy.

Recruiting his nephew

"He's an amazing teacher. Very strong. I've learned so much from him…"
―Kellan Oris, on his uncle
Though reluctant to take on another apprentice at first, when   awakened in Arin Solara's nephew Kellan Oris and his mother Leia could see the dark side taking hold of her son, she entrusted the boy to her brother to help him find balance. He agreed to train the 10-year-old Solo, in 15 ABY. Arin Solara took on the responsibilities of a Wardens Master by teaching his nephew. After Ben's fall to the dark side however, Luke would say that he was merely playing the role of Wardens Master as it was a title he had not formally earned.

Arin Solara taught Solo the ways of the Wardens, in its many forms, under the tutelage and impressed on his pupil the importance of practicing discipline and control. Solo gave his best efforts to gain his Master's approval, although at times their familial bond caused him to address Arin Solara as uncle instead of Master. Though he loved his nephew, Arin Solara had committed his life to reestablishing the Warden Order's teachings, which had virtually nothing to do with family ties; therefore, he taught Solo that detachment and distance were necessary to gaining the pure focus that every Wardens aspired to achieve.

His nephew soon joined in exploring the galaxy for ancient Wardens lore, and together they found Lore Prisms from forgotten eras and ancient Wardens texts with arcane writings. The two shared more than the same Arin Solara blood, for like him, Ben gained a strong devotion to the ways of the Warden Order. Arin Solara saw his nephew's raw power and believed he could pass on his strengths to him, and he attempted to manage his progress through   by having him exercise a level of restraint. Solo was his strongest and most prized student, and Arin Solara went on to place his hope for the Warden Order's future within his nephew, and despite knowing of the darkness within his pupil, the Wardens Master believed he was strong enough to keep it in check.

Arin Solara was a kind master, and Solo considered his uncle to be a strong and amazing teacher, but Arin Solara made mistakes that culminated over time, protecting Ben from the dark truths of their family, much like his sister did before him, and inadvertently isolated Ben over the years of his training. At the request of his sister, Luke never provided his nephew with the details of Ardan Velgor's fall to the dark side or  's redemption and return to the light.

During his training of his nephew, a powerful dark side-practitioner known as Snoke, who was the Supreme Leader of a splinter group of the Dominion known as the Prime Syndic, and also secretly a puppet of the resurrected Vorath Sable, began influencing Ben from afar, clouding him with the dark side. At some point Arin Solara had encountered Snoke and supposedly damaged him, and Snoke was responsible for indirectly inspiring Luke to rebuild the Warden Order, having tried to shatter his resolve.

More apprentices

"We all studied together. I was first, but they came not long after."
―Kellan Oris, on Luke's training other apprentices
Around 16 ABY, Arin Solara gathered disciples, young  -sensitive beings adrift with no way to harness their abilities as a result the Wardens Purge, who went on to be his first students. Arin Solara's new students numbered about a dozen besides his nephew, including students Voe, Tai, and Hennix, and he worked to teach them everything he had learned in his own training and about the light side of   per Eldar Voss's command.

Arin Solara hoped that teaching the students in a real Wardens Temple would offer them a more traditional Wardens path than his own training under Oren Kael and Eldar Voss. He kept temple's location on Ossus a secret known only to the members of the Order and his loyal droid RN-7. Arin Solara stored the recovered Wardens knowledge and relics that he and Lor San Tekka had recovered within the Wardens Temple, a decision which Solo disagreed, which he believed was just locked up and never used.

With the small gathering of his new students looking to him as a spiritual guide and mentor for the Wardens arts, Arin Solara believed he could usher in a new era of enlightenment. With his attention now split between several other apprentices, Arin Solara's nephew Kellan Oris's focus was drawn away to dark   knowledge. Teaching several Wardens techniques and traditions as telekinesis, meditation, and the use and construction of Lumen Blades, Arin Solara's approach for guiding the young minds under his care was steeped in his own master Eldar Voss's teachings passed on while he was on Vyrn Swale, so would often be preaching about patience and balance.

While also instilling the belief that all beings were equal within  , he gave lectures outside his temple, passing on ever more experience from training with Eldar Voss on Vyrn Swale as he taught the levitation of rocks through  . During one such event, student Voe asked why Kellan Oris was stronger, where Arin Solara compared   to a door, that it would become easier to use the more she opened herself up to it. The Wardens Master also tutored Hennix in opening Lore Prisms through  , reminding the young Quarren to listen to the unique voices of each Lore Prism, for each one was different based on their teachings.

Arin Solara desired heavily to preserve the teachings of the Warden Order, laboring to pass on the best of what Eldar Voss and Obi-Wan taught him as Wardens mentors at his Wardens temple and to instill the core beliefs they embodied within the next generation. Additionally, Luke understood what Eldar Voss experienced with himself on Vyrn Swale as teacher, having the same unique frustrations with his own pupils; a master guiding a young unseasoned student that was convinced they were wasting time on pointless exercises, such as stacking stones.

Encountering the Knights of Ren

"Well, hello there. Everything here is ours. We're going to take it…but how we take it is up to you. Your call, friends."
"You're wrong. So, so wrong. This is a Wardens outpost. Everything in it belongs to the Warden Order, which, at the moment, means me. I am the last Wardens."
―Ren and Arin Solara
In 19 ABY, the year his nephew turned fourteen, Arin Solara, Ben, and Lor San Tekka traveled to a Wardens outpost on Elphrona, a location from the days of the High Concord Era, hoping to find Wardens artifacts. Luke flew the ship and conversed with San Tekka, while Solo, without his master's knowledge, was communing with Snoke. Arin Solara was initially skeptical of a Wardens presence so far from the core, but San Tekka assured him that with his expertise he had recognized the description from his contact as a Wardens Outpost, and explained that the Wardens's activity was greatly expanded throughout the galaxy during the High Concord Era. Meanwhile, Solo telepathically communicated with Snoke, expressing that he was tired of missions to find artifacts with Arin Solara that he would just lock away in the temple and never use. Solo admitted that Arin Solara was an amazing teacher, but was frustrated that he never wanted Solo to use any of the things he had taught him, which Snoke claimed was because Arin Solara viewed Solo as a child and had not realized his true capabilities. Arin Solara then told Solo that they would possibly find insights into the old Wardens, and added that they could find interesting weapons, as he knew that Solo was interested in such subjects, which San Tekka affirmed. Arin Solara told Solo he was glad he came along, and Solo said he shared the sentiment.

When they landed, Arin Solara was impressed by the sight of the outpost. He cautioned his apprentice to careful and warned that such a place was likely to be rigged with traps, recalling a time he found a Lumen Blade in a similar place that turned out to be a trap and nearly killed him. Inside, they found a treasure trove that Arin Solara judged so impressive he thought it may be better than Jocasta Nu's cache, including many Wardens Lore Prisms and a Lumen Blade rifle. Arin Solara was excited by the possibility of learning many new things. As the three perused the outpost, instantly, both Arin Solara and Solo felt a cold presence within the structure. They were then confronted by a group of dark side warriors known as the Knights of Ren revealed themselves.

Their master, "Ren," declared themselves, and claimed ownership of all within the outpost and that they way they took it was up to Arin Solara. Arin Solara countered, shooting back that all within the outpost, due it being a Wardens location, belonged to the Order; all the Lore Prisms and relics belonged to Luke, for he was the last Wardens Knight even though he would not be for long. Arin Solara told the Knights he could sense the dark side in them and would never let them have the artifacts. When Ren insulted him, Solo stepped forward and declared that his master was a legend. Arin Solara ignited his saber and instructed San Tekka to hang back and Solo to protect San Tekka, while handled the threat, assuring Solo he could do it even thought there were seven of them. Ren tried to taunt him, but Arin Solara just taunted him back, angering him and moving him to order the Knights to attack. As Solo watched on and called out to him, Arin Solara engaged the knights, not intending to kill any of them, and managed to overpower them quite easily despite their numbers, which he explained as him not being alone because he had the powerful ally that was   by his side. He criticized them for their crude use of  , saying they wielded the dark side like a hammer, contrasted by his blade-like precision with the light side. He eventually used   to destroy the Knights' weapons and proceeded to prepare himself for a duel with Ren, who wielded a red Lumen Blade. Ren informed Arin Solara that he activated a kill switch on his Lumen Blade that would detonate the room if it left his hand. Arin Solara warned that move might not go the way Ren expected, which Ren agreed with. Realizing that Arin Solara's power was far superior to their own, Ren withdrew his knights and left the planet. However, before he left, Ren removed his helmet and warned Arin Solara about the strong presence of the dark side within Solo, before offering the boy chance, if he chose, to seek them out if decided he wanted another path.

Ultimately, the structure proved to be a source of more knowledge for Arin Solara, for he recovered the Lore Prisms and other relics inside, leaving the outpost empty, but his nephew was prompted with the dark side of  .

Quest for Noctyra

Visions and voices

"But this…place, whatever it is. I'm seeing it for a reason, Lor. I can feel it."
―Arin Solara to Lor San Tekka on his visions
As his first disciples grew older and new younglings came into the New Warden Order's care, Arin Solara had a Twi'lek named Enyo help him as one of the younglings' instructors.

In 21 ABY, Arin Solara started feeling an increasing darkness in   and having dark visions that frequently came to him in meditation. One day, Lor San Tekka, who was the only person Arin Solara told about the visions, visited Arin Solara in his temple on Ossus, his old friend's arrival heralded to Arin Solara by Kellan Oris. San Tekka greeted Arin Solara and Solo, but once the latter was gone, asked Arin Solara about the visions and whether or not they had become stronger or changed. Arin Solara asked San Tekka to help him understand the visions and learn what the place in them was by standing vigil over him while he accessed the vision and described it. San Tekka was hesitant, but agreed, and Arin Solara thus began the meditation.

Much quicker than his other meditations, Arin Solara found himself in an empty dark void but felt an all-consuming presence within it which he had only thought he had sensed before. Then the vision shifted and he found himself standing on the ancient hidden Vyrn world of Noctyra, though he did not know that was what he was seeing. Eventually the vision broke, and Arin Solara explained to San Tekka what he had seen. San Tekka wondered if the vision was just a general representation of lingering darkness or an influence from an artifact, but Arin Solara still believed he was having the vision for a reason. Arin Solara asked San Tekka the reason he had come to Ossus in the first place, and he explained that there was an archaeological dig on the planet Yoturba that he wanted to check out with Arin Solara, convincing him to leave the temple by saying that it would be good for Solo to learn responsibilities while he was gone.

Yoturba

"I saw… a place. Darkness, and lightning. It was so dry, so old. And…There was something there. A…person. No. A shape. Like a…a shadow. It was…on me, I could feel it, I could hear it speaking to me."
―Mico Haswell to Arin Solara, after being influenced by a kyber crystal bled with the dark side of  
Arin Solara and San Tekka arrived at the archeological expedition on Yorturba that was being conducted by the Lerct Historical Institute and were greeted by archaeologist Dr. Beaumont Kin, who informed them that the dig site was disappointing and they had not found a Wardens temple. Arin Solara still carried a feeling that he was there for a reason despite this, and he would be proven correct when an archaeologist named Tee Mairi discovered a Vyrn Lore Prism at the site. Arin Solara recognized it immediately, and San Tekka recognized the writing on it as the Vyrn's mirrored Aurebesh. Arin Solara still was not convinced that it was what he had sensed there, and would be again proved correct when he heard screaming echoing throughout the site. Archeologist Mico Haswell had discovered a Vyrn kyber crystal and had his mind influenced by it, causing him to uncontrollably lash out and cause destruction with  . Luke restrained him with  , but in reaching out to him once again had a vision of Noctyra that Haswell was now present in. Haswell leapt toward Arin Solara in the vison and moved in a way that Arin Solara recognized to be inhuman and even reptilian. Then Arin Solara was on Yoturba again and managed to restrain the man with   again, calling a team of medics to sedate him via an injection.

Haswell was once again in control of himself, and Arin Solara questioned him about what happened, though the man was not able to remember much. He did tell Arin Solara that he saw a dry, dark place filled with lightning and felt a shadow-like sentient presence there. Once Haswell passed out, Arin Solara discovered the bled kyber crystal in his hand, and confiscated it. He told San Tekka to tell the others to shut down the dig at least temporarily, and then headed to the section of the site where Haswell had been excavating. He discovered that the chamber was actually a crashed ship, and discovered more bled kyber crystals within it, that like the one Haswell had been holding, were the wrong size and shape for a Lumen Blade. This and his experience on the planet confirmed for Arin Solara that something dark and evil was coming, deciding to leave San Tekka there to look over the dig site while he went to Tython in search of answers.

Ghosts of the past

"Remember, my son, no matter how dark the night may grow, you are never alone. You will know what to do, my son. Let   guide you. Let it flow through you as it flows through me. Use that power, and your instincts, for they are one and the same."
―Ardan Velgor, to Arin Solara
Arin Solara traveled to Tython and visited the ruined Wardens temple known as  -henge, where he sat on the seeing stone and began to study the Vyrn Lore Prism and the kyber crystals and perform research through his many ancient tomes and personal notes. In a book that was a catalog of the Eeshaypher Collection, Arin Solara discovered an entry about a Vyrn wayfinder, which he found remarkably similar in appearance and utility to the Vyrn Lore Prism. The book stated that the wayfinders contained navigational data to an ancient Vyrn world called Ixigul—or in Arin Solara's translation: Noctyra. Arin Solara gleaned from both the catalog and his other research that Noctyra was meant to be a place of power and eternal life, and that its secret was so important that only two Vyrn wayfinders were ever made. He theorized that the crashed ship from Yoturba had been from someone attempting to use the Lore Prism and the kyber crystals to navigate to Noctyra, and thus decided to use the power of the seeing stone to meditate while reaching out to the crystals and Lore Prism to see what he could discover.

During his meditation, Arin Solara once again had a vision of Noctyra, but this time if felt like he was truly on the planet, causing him to wonder if the information stored in the Lore Prism had allowed the seeing stone to actually transport him to the planet. Arin Solara was then approached by nine Vyrn wraiths on the planet who ignited red Lumen Blades and began to attack him. Arin Solara could block their Lumen Blades with his own, but could not attack the wraiths themselves, his blade and his body merely passing right through them. He was blinded by the lightning flashes on Noctyra and the intense bright light of the wraith's blades that made them look inverted and black. Arin Solara started struggling to fight them more and more until all nine wraiths eventually went in for one coordinated strike, but before they could a blue glow in the shape of a person holding a Lumen Blade appeared in from of Arin Solara and pushed them away. Arin Solara realized he was being assisted by a  -spirit with a blue-bladed Lumen Blade and initially thought was Kenobi, but when the figure lowered his hood, Arin Solara learned that it was his father, Ardan Velgor. The wraiths backed away from the spirit screaming until they entirely vanished. Ardan Velgor then reached out his hand to Luke, who took it and then found himself back on Tython as if he had never left.

Luke found that many of his books were burning and the Lore Prism was completely destroyed, putting them out before speaking to Anakin. Anakin's figure flashed in and out and shifted between him as a young Wardens and him as the old man Luke had seen behind the mask of  . Luke noticed that he seemed to be in pain and afraid. Anakin explained that there was a disturbance in   that was a shadow from an ancient time. He also clarified that the seeing stone had sent a part of Luke to Noctyra and that it had taken everything in him to bring him back. Anakin reminded Luke that he could divert the path of   if he needed to, and that no matter how dark things seemed he was never alone as long as he allowed   to be his guide. Anakin then disappeared and left Luke alone until he heard the sound of a ship flying overhead and landing. It was Daro Callen, in the Lady Luck, who greeted Luke, but immediately told him that he needed to leave and that it was too dangerous for him to be there. But Calrissian told him that Lor San Tekka had told him where he was because Calrissian had information about the Vyrn, and also believed they were back.

Calrissian's mission

"We need to find the family. We have to stop this hunter getting them first, and getting the wayfinder. Luke, listen, you said it yourself. There's a disturbance in  , a, what did you call it, a shadow, and it's coming at us fast."
―Daro Callen, to Arin Solara on the family being pursued by Ochi of Bestoon
Calrissian brought Arin Solara onto his ship and explained that overheard an assassin named Ochi of Bestoon who had become inebriated at a remote bar bragging that he had been sent by a Vyrn remnant to kidnap a girl from her parents. Lando elaborated that he had checked out a New Concord report, about Halo Squadron fighting off hunters attacking the family's ship Wild Space that backed up Ochi's story, explaining that the New Concord had apparently relocated the family after the incident. He then displayed a hologram of a hex charm that the family had been carrying as proof that they were being hunted by the Vyrn. Arin Solara recognized it immediately as a symbol of the Vyrn and decoded mirrored Aurebesh on it to be a Vyrn saying.

Calrissian expressed his worry over Ochi's implication that the Vyrn were still out there pulling strings, and wondered why they would want that family and go through the trouble of kidnapping the girl. Arin Solara told Calrissian about his visions of Noctyra, and told him that the way to the planet was hidden in a Vyrn wayfinder. Calrissian added that he had heard Ochi mention that he would have a way to Noctyra soon, and wondered if the family had a wayfinder or knew where one was. But unbeknownst to Arin Solara and Calrissian, the father of the family was a strand-cast of the late Vorath Sable named Dathan, and the girl, his daughter named Rey, was thus Palpatine's genetic granddaughter.

Calrissian decided that he and Arin Solara needed to go together to find the family and stop the hunter from getting to them, urging Arin Solara to get ahead of the shadow that he had sensed before it was too late. Arin Solara was hesitant to bring Calrissian along, but agreed to partially because he was aware of Calrissian's daughter's kidnapping and his friend's desperate hope that investigating this kidnapping could lead to her. They agreed to meet at the Adelphi system where Calrissian had a contact with the New Concord that they hoped could tell them where the New Concord had sent the family.

Nightside

"It's them. Those are the same kind of ships that were chasing the family. […] Okay, we're out of time. We have to get to that hangar."
"The dark side. It's here. I can feel it."
―Calrissian and Arin Solara, as Ochi's  s and the Vyrn arrive on Nightside
Arin Solara and Calrissian met with the latter's contact, Shriv Suurgav, in the New Concord staging outpost over the planet Adelphi. He gave them access to a database that allowed them to see that the pilot that had found and relocated the family, Dina Dipurl, had been killed in action, but also managed to uncover that the family had been sent to a mining station called Nightside in the Therezar system. Arin Solara and Calrissian traveled to the station with the hope of making contact with Calrissian's old acquaintance Zargo Anaximander. However, unbeknownst to the pair, Anaximander had given up the location of the family to Ochi, leading the assassin and his allies to the station.

Using a clearance code that Anaximander had given Calrissian years earlier, Arin Solara and Calrissian were able to land their ship in the VIP hangar of Nightside. They located the family's ship but discovered that it was empty. Using  , Arin Solara located the family and sensed that they were aboard Anaximander's personal yacht Goldstone. RN-7 then tapped into the station's surveillance systems and discovered from recordings that Dathan and Miramir were planning to escape with their daughter Rey. Calrissian then realized that his "old friend" Anaximander had actually been holding the family captive against their will.

Before Arin Solara and Calrissian can reach the family, the station under attack by the Droid Crush Pirates of Bestoon, who, even though they were working for Ochi, ignored Ochi's orders for a clean extraction of the family and instead performed a raid on Nightside. Arin Solara was able to sense in   that the attackers were the same people pursuing the family. During the attack, Arin Solara and Calrissian split up, Arin Solara tasking Calrissian with helping the family escape while he took on the assailants.

Left alone, Arin Solara used   to track a Vyrn presence that he felt, ending up in a cable train station. A masked Pantoran woman then landed there in a customized imperial TIE Defender, and when she exited it, Arin Solara noticed that she appeared to be a Vyrn and was wielding the ancient lost Lumen Blade of Darth Noctyss. The two began to duel, the woman ordering Arin Solara to hand her the shards of the bled Kyber crystal from Yoturba. Realizing that she was possessed by a Vyrn spirit, Arin Solara offered to help free her while warning that he would defend himself. Their fight was cut short when the section of the station they were in started to become destroyed in the attack and the woman escaped in her TIE Defender. Arin Solara was saved by Calrissian in the Lady Luck, who informed Arin Solara that he had helped the family escape the station in Anaximander's personal Yacht the Goldstone.

Torrenoteer Minor

"I'm sorry, Lando. I'm sorry for everything. And of course it means the same to me as it does to you. That family needs us. We might be their only hope."
"What's this, a Wardens with feelings? I thought that wasn't supposed to happen. Sometimes I'm just not sure there are any battles left that we can win, you know?"
"These people are important, and we're going to find them."
―Arin Solara consoles Calrissian on the loss of his daughter and resolves to find the fugitive family
Arin Solara and Calrissian followed the Goldstone via transmissions aboard the Lady Luck, Arin Solara telling Arin Solara about his encounter with the Vyrn acolyte on Nightside. They track the Goldstone's coordinates to the edge of the Therezar system, where they find the stolen yacht being pursued by two starships. Before the Goldstone jumped into hyperspace, RN-7 was able to deduce that the family was fleeing to the Torrenoteer system. Following the trail of the Goldstone, Arin Solara and Calrissian land Lady Luck on the desert world of Torrenoteer Minor, the two continuing their search for the family on two Stacker Polaris Stormwolf speeder bikes. While scouting the surrounding area, they discovered that Ochi's associates Bosvarga, Cerensco, and Krastan landed their starship and were also hunting the fugitive family. When the bounty hunters split into two parties, Arin Solara and Calrissian also decided to split up in order to track the hunters.

While riding his speeder bike through a ravine system, Arin Solara was ambushed by the two bounty hunters, also riding speeder bikes. Arin Solara deflected their blaster bolts of using his Lumen Blade, and hit one bolt back at one of the hunters, causing the hunter's speeder bike to crash in a ravine. Arin Solara chased the second speeder over a lake, once again deflecting the hunter's blaster bolts, causing the hunter and his speeder bike to fall in the lake by hitting the bolts back at him. Arin Solara then approached the Weequay hunter in his wrecked vehicle and attempted to question him, but he fought Arin Solara instead and subsequently died from being impaled by his speeder bike's steering vane. While examining the hunter's bike, Arin Solara discovered a message indicating that the hunter's associates believe they have found something "nice and juicy."

Heading to coordinates transmitted by the hunter's associates, Arin Solara found that the Gran hunter Krastan had captured Lando and was holding him in the prisoner clamp of a CAP-2 walker. Arin Solara fought Krastan with his Lumen Blade, killing him by defecting his own blaster bolts back at him. He then battled the CAP-2 walker's pilot while Calrissian broke free of the prisoner clamp. Arin Solara sliced the CAP-2's left leg with his Lumen Blade, causing the machine to stumble, before using   to throw the machine to the ground. After taking out the pilot, Arin Solara rejoined and attended to Lando, who explained that the hunters had followed him to the Goldstone but that the ship had fled before they could breach it. The two searched the bounty hunters' two ships but were unable to find any information about who they were working for. While attempting to access one of the ship's navigation computers, Arin Solara inadvertently activated a self-destruct mechanism that destroyed the ship's systems, preventing them from tracking down the family's ship. Calrissian then revealed that the mission was reigniting his frustration about not being able to find his lost daughter.

Polaar

"Yupe Tashu was revealed as the true master of the Acolytes of the Beyond. […] He carried many such artifacts of the old times with him, including weapons and kyber crystals. But most important of all was the mask of Viceroy Exim Panshard. It was to Kiza he bequeathed this most powerful of relics."
"She put it on, and Exim Panshard lived again."
―Komat and Daro Callen, on how Kiza became possessed by Vyrn Lord Exim Panshard
Arin Solara had begun to suspect that the woman he encountered was related to a dark side cult called the Acolytes of the Beyond that he had fought before. Arin Solara and Calrissian used his friend Lina Graf's ship the Star Herald to travel to the planet Polaar to get information from Komat, a woman who was formerly part of the Acolytes of the Beyond who collected Vyrn artifacts like the Lumen Blade of Darth Noctyss. Arin Solara also believed that she would have the ability to track the Goldstone for them. When Arin Solara had previously encountered the Acolytes of the Beyond, he had met her and had helped her leave the cult. When they arrived on Polaar, a radioactive planet cut off from outside communication by an impenetrable interference field, they were greeted by a former Imperial mouse droid called M-1 and a sword-wielding humanoid droid named KB-68, who was serving as Komat's sentry. Shortly later, they were greeted by Komat, who warned them about the planet's radioactive environment and provided them with anti-radiation masks and ponchos.

Agreeing to help them if they helped her in turn, Komat took them to a wrecked Mon Calamari cruiser that crashed on Polaar during the Dominion Uprising, explaining that with the shields overloaded, the ship's fusion core had melted down, contaminating the planet with distronic radiation that rendered it uninhabitable for most lifeforms. Arin Solara and Calrissian help Komat repair her particle capture grid, which she used to harvest radiation that KB-68 sold for supplies in the Pirsen system. In return, Komat revealed that the woman Arin Solara had encountered was named Kiza, and had once been her friend. She explained that Kiza had worked directly for Yupe Tashu, the leader Acolytes of the Beyond and one of the Emperor's advisors, who had gifted her the Mask of Viceroy Exim Panshard which contained the preserved consciousness of the ancient Vyrn Lord Exim Panshard and allowed him to take over her when she wore it. Arin Solara revealed that they believed she was working with Ochi to hunt down a fugitive family in order to obtain a wayfinder. Explaining that two Vyrn wayfinders were made as navigational guides to Noctyra, the hidden Vyrn world, Komat became determined to help Arin Solara and Calrissian stop Kiza and keep her from reaching Noctyra.

Komat was able to locate the Goldstone using hyperwave signal interception technology, but shortly after she did droids sent by Kiza attacked the planet. Arin Solara and Calrissian join Komat, KB-68, and Komat's feline pet targon Sekhmet in battling the droids. Arin Solara and the others managed to defeat them, and after being brought one of the droid's heads by M-1, they discovered that the droids contained bled kyber crystals that were also pieces of the large broken one Arin Solara had found on Yoturba. Arin Solara decided that he would use the droids' navigational data to locate Kiza and make sure that she and subsequently Exim Panshard did not make it to Noctyra, and thus make sure the Vyrn did not return. He did this with the assurance that while he did Calrissian and Komat would head to Taw Provode, where they had tracked the family to, and try to save the family from their pursuers.

Kiza

"I can help you right now, Kiza. I can see what the mask has done to you. How it feeds off you, off your anger and your pain. The more you suffer, the stronger it gets. It will kill you, and then when you die, it will find someone else. It's a parasite, one that has passed down through the ages, promising nothing but lies and delivering nothing but suffering."
―Arin Solara to Kiza, on the mask of Vyrn Lord Exim Panshard
Using coordinates retrieved from the droid lander's navigation computer, Arin Solara and RN-7 located Kiza by tracking the attackers' origin to an asteroid at the edge of the Red Honeycomb Zone. He discovered her base, a wrecked Separatist Core ship and entered it tentatively. He discovered a droid forge and a meditation chamber with the Mask of Exim Panshard sitting on a plinth inside, but when he looked at it was overwhelmed with all consuming vision's of Panshard's life, including his acts of mass murder committed against his people in order to drain his life   in an attempt to live forever. When Kiza arrived, Arin Solara attempted to try and appeal to her and choose a good path, with the woman even clearly expressing regret. He insisted that the mask was using her and she did not have to listen to it, but Kiza explained that it had promised her rebirth on Noctyra, which Arin Solara told her was a lie. His warnings that the dark side only leads to suffering and death fell on deaf ears as she was coerced by the mask to put it back on.

Kiza engaged Arin Solara in Lumen Blade combat, fueled by the knowledge of Panshard. Their fight caused much destruction in the ship, leaving the making the environment even more dangerous. While fighting, Kiza used   in attempt to pour hot molten metal onto Arin Solara, but the Wardens Master used   to escape the ensuing molten fire in the droid foundry. However, molten material began to spread everywhere melt the ship. Arin Solara attempted one last time to reach Kiza, pleading with her to leave it behind and join him. Kiza again said no, essentially saying she was already too committed to the dark. The core ship collapsed and rubble fell on top of and killed Kiza, much to Arin Solara's dismay.

Arin Solara then retrieved several ancient texts from the meditation chamber but was unable to find Panshard's mask. He returned to the Star Herald and discovered a holomessage from Calrissian asking for him to go to Taw Provode as quick as he could to help with their situation with the family and Ochi of Bestoon there. But unbeknownst to Arin Solara, Panshard's mask survived, and as he departed some of Kiza's droids followed programming to reforge the mask with melted bled kyber crystals, before placing the mask on Kiza's dead body, allowing Panshard to live again by possessing and reanimating her body.

Clue to Noctyra

"Luke and I were tailing an old Wardens hunter. Ochi of Bestoon. He was carrying a clue that could lead to a wayfinder. We followed his ship halfway across the galaxy here. When we got to his ship, it was abandoned.... No clue. No wayfinder."
―Daro Callen, on his and Luke's mission to Pasaana
Arin Solara arrived on Taw Provode just as Calrissian and Komat had been discovered and captured by Ochi of Bestoon and his subordinate Corsec  s. Arin Solara faced off with Ochi, and was surprised that his Lumen Blade did not cut through Ochi's dagger. The power of Ochi's dagger allowed him to hold himself off against the Wardens for some time until Arin Solara managed to use his Lumen Blade to ignite a fuels reserve and trigger a massive explosion. Panshard appeared in his TIE Defender and started shooting at Arin Solara and the others, leading Arin Solara to realize that the mask was not really destroyed and the ancient Vyrn Lord lived on. Arin Solara and Komat decided to chase him into space, while Calrissian and RN-7 went after the family.

Arin Solara and Komat followed Panshard to Taw Provode's solitary moon, using the Star Herald to shoot his TIE Defender down and strand him on the moon. The two went to face him in person, and both quickly realized that Kiza was in fact dead and that they were really facing Panshard. Panshard told Arin Solara to tell him how to get to Noctyra or be killed, but Arin Solara and Komat refused and instead faced off with their Lumen Blades. Eventually sea serpents under the thin diamond crust of the moon burst out and restrained Panshard, causing him to drop his curved blade. Arin Solara picked it up and then called the mask to him with   before slicing it into four pieces with the two Lumen Blades and destroying Panshard for good.

Arin Solara was informed by Calrissian that he had found the bodies of the parents of the family, but that the girl was still missing. Arin Solara, Calrissian, RN-7, and Komat traveled to Neftali, where they buried them and honored their lives. Arin Solara and Calrissian worried that Ochi had successfully captured the girl and taken her to Noctyra, but they could not be sure, and decided to keep looking for Ochi.

After Calrissian took a time to recover by working with Komat at her homestead, Arin Solara and Calrissian eventually tracked Ochi to Pasaana where they found his ship but no Ochi. They did find a sheet of old-looking paper with a wayfinder drawn on it that proved that Ochi had had a clue to a wayfinder, but other than that, the trail went cold. Arin Solara then returned to Ossus to continue running his Wardens academy and left Calrissian on Pasanna, who decided to use the planet as his base to look for both the lost girl and his daughter. Arin Solara stored the pieces of bled kyber crystal and the shards of Exim Panshard's mask in the temple with other artifacts. Arin Solara would chronicle his efforts to trace the disturbance in   and find the Vyrn Wayfinder in the Rammahgon throughout his explorations in the galaxy.

Telling a story

"Considering… Well, your family, your skill in  , and that you'll be one of the first students to complete your training… It seems likely that you could hold a position of leadership in the Warden Order to come."
―Arin Solara, to Kellan Oris
During Ben's training on Ossus, Arin Solara asked his nephew to accompany him on a walk through the temple grounds. As they walked, Arin Solara told Solo that he was almost ready to undergo the Wardens Trials, the completion of which would mark the end of their time together as Master and apprentice.

According to Arin Solara, Solo would no longer have to listen to a master since he would be free to make his own decisions as a fully-trained Wardens Knight. In addition, Arin Solara acknowledged Solo's potential to become a future leader in the Warden Order that he was working to restore, given his nephew's status as a Arin Solara, his strength in  , and the fact that he stood poised to be among the first in his generation to complete his instruction in the Wardens arts. Having faced his own challenges as a leader, Arin Solara wished to tell his apprentice a story about an incident from his past, its purpose to serve as a lesson in making difficult decisions.

Arin Solara's story centered on his discovery and subsequent use of the Grim Rose, an ancient weapon that he discovered upon returning to the Living Sea on the planet Gazian. Solo learned that Arin Solara had considered using the Grim Rose to assassinate Vorath Sable; using a sample of Palpatine's blood, the weapon could be used to target and kill the Emperor. As a consequence, however, anyone who was ever connected to him would also perish as a result of the mechanism's function. Solo theorized that the weapon had the capacity to destroy the Vyrn. Being aware of Vader's connection to Palpatine, Solo was certain that the weapon would have scanned Vader as well, ultimately resulting in the deaths of both Vyrn Lords. Arin Solara revealed that while he had considered that possibility, he was still reluctant to allow the Grim Rose to carry out its programming, having begun to think that he could redeem Vader. By the end of the story, Arin Solara revealed that the lesson behind the story was "to not defeat evil by becoming evil." Solo questioned if it was a true story or simply a parable, to which Arin Solara assured him that it was all true.

Fallen apprentice

Kellan Oris's betrayal

"I saw darkness. I sensed it building in him. I'd seen it in moments during his training. But then I looked inside, and it was beyond what I ever imagined. Snoke had already turned his heart. He would bring destruction, pain, death, and the end of everything I love because of what he will become. And for the briefest moment of pure instinct, I thought I could stop it. It passed like a fleeting shadow. And I was left with shame and with consequence. And the last thing I saw were the eyes of a frightened boy whose master had failed him."
―Arin Solara
One night in 28 ABY, Arin Solara, sensing the darkness within his nephew Ben growing in glimpses during his training, decided to probe Solo's mind as he lay asleep. He learned that Snoke had turned his apprentice's heart to the dark side, and experienced a brief dark vision that Solo would bring nothing but death and destruction and leave Arin Solara's loved ones in anguish. Despite the love for his nephew, in a flash of defensive instinct, Arin Solara thought he could stop that future and for a brief moment of pure instinct he raised his Lumen Blade to destroy him, believing that it was the only way to halt his descent into darkness and prevent the end of everything he loved. This instinct was gone almost the second that it had come, and Arin Solara was immediately filled with shame.

Arin Solara had failed to correctly view that his nephew's mind was still conflicted, and his choice not yet made between light and darkness. From Rey's point of view, Arin Solara's failure as not only Solo's Wardens Master, but his uncle and family, had been completed when this occurred.

Solo had already awoken to see his uncle standing over him with his Lumen Blade raised. Confused and angry, Solo pulled his own Lumen Blade to him in self-defense and attacked Arin Solara, using   to pull down the hut on top of him. Solo emerged from the hut and screamed toward the temple, asking Arin Solara why he had done it, and in his anger bringing down a lightning strike with   that destroyed the temple and set it on fire. When Arin Solara came around, he emerged from the rubble of the hut to find his temple destroyed, with his other apprentices either killed or vanished along with Solo. This effectively left Arin Solara the last of the Wardens once more as he was after the death of his own master, Eldar Voss, decades earlier.

Three of Arin Solara's apprentices, Tai, Hennix, and Voe, eventually returned to the temple while it burned and were not able to sense his presence, which they normally felt overwhelmingly in  . When Solo claimed that Arin Solara had tried to kill him and that he was dead, they did not believe the former, but did believe the latter because they could not sense their master's presence. Solo claimed that he was stronger than Arin Solara when it mattered and left the planet, the three pursuing Solo with the hope of avenging Arin Solara. When Solo considered leaving to go to his mother in the aftermath, he heard the voice of Snoke in his head perpetuating his belief that Arin Solara had tried to kill him, as he and Solo had feared it before, claiming that Arin Solara was "small" and feared Solo and his strength. Snoke continued to speak to Solo, blaming Arin Solara for everything that had happened and claiming he chose it, and Solo decided to go to Snoke instead of his mother. On the Amaxine Space Station, with Snoke, Solo noticed the man's appearance and asked him what Arin Solara had done to him, but Snoke redirected the conversation to what Arin Solara had done to Solo. Solo tried to claim it did not matter because he had killed the Wardens Master, but Snoke warned that Arin Solara was not dead and would not die so easily, though agreed to stop talking about Arin Solara because he had "stolen" too much of his life already. Solo eventually became the apprentice of Snoke and took the new name "Vorin Kade," becoming the leader of a group of dark side warriors known as the Knights of Ren.

Left deeply affected and mentally broken by what he believed to be his ultimate failure, Arin Solara lost faith in   and the vision of the Wardens for having failed to rebuild the Warden Order. Arin Solara believed he had failed to protect his students, and also failed to save his own flesh and blood from his family's dark legacy. So Arin Solara fled into self-imposed exile, vanishing from the galaxy at-large without a trace. No one knew for sure where he went, but those closest to him believed he went off in search of the first Wardens Temple.

To those who knew what Arin Solara was seeking, there remained a way to find him: after destroying the Wardens, the Dominion had begun to seek out the thousands of Wardens temples scattered across the galaxy, with the aim to prevent anyone from discovering the lost secrets of the Order. As such, Imperial authorities discovered the locations of some of the first Wardens Temples. The partial map remained within the archives of the Dominion. The Prime Syndic was able to acquire the partial map from the archives, that was missing a fraction owned by Lor San Tekka. As he had downloaded Imperial star maps during his time on the first  , RN-7, Arin Solara's faithful astromech, was able to recover the contents of the map.

Vorin Kade's vision

"Your Uncle feared you. Feared how formidable you could become. Your hatred for him is right. Arin Solara would have murdered you in your sleep. Rise above what's holding you back. Strike. Strike against the light side within you! STRIKE!"
―Snoke to Vorin Kade as he fought a vision of Arin Solara
Later, while training Vorin Kade with an exercise in which he  d Ren to stop himself from falling, Snoke informed the boy that Arin Solara would have caught him if he had not caught himself, and would have thus held him back. Snoke then took Ren to the Cave of Evil on Vyrn Swale, where Ren could sense that Arin Solara had been there, Snoke revealing that he had trained there before becoming one of the most formidable Wardens. Ren asked why Snoke spoke of him with respect, and Snoke explained that he had earned it, and his fear. Ren tried to claim that Arin Solara was weak, but Snoke refuted this, insisting that Arin Solara was only misguided and that he would have taken over the galaxy a long time before if Arin Solara had been his apprentice.

Ren then entered the cave and found himself facing an apparition of Arin Solara, who insisted that he did not want to fight. Ren fought him anyway, his red crossguard Lumen Blade clashing against Arin Solara's green. Snoke egged Ren on and validated his hatred as he fought his old master, insisting that Arin Solara had feared what Ren would become, would have murdered him in his sleep, and was representative of the light side holding him back. Screaming as Snoke told him to strike, Ren sliced through Arin Solara's body, leaving the appearance of his dead body lying on the ground of the cave. While staring at the corpse, Ren declared himself ready.

Exile on Ahch-To

Shutting himself off from  

"You've closed yourself off from  ."
―Rey, to Arin Solara
The Wardens Master fled to the location of the Temple—on an aquatic planet named Ahch-To—that he discovered by studying the spread of uneti saplings. Having failed in bringing back the Warden Order, Arin Solara intended nothing more than to live out the rest of his days there in reclusive exile and had pledged to protect the hidden world and its many secrets. Taking the relics he had uncovered with him, the hermit shut himself off from  , consequently ceasing the guidance of Oren Kael, Eldar Voss, and Ardan Velgor's spirits. It had taken years for him to learn the discipline of blocking   out, and he considered the fact that it was harder to do so than to feel it and let it in a dark secret that was never taught. He believed   and the Wardens had many secrets and that not even the greatest and in his opinion arrogant Wardens Masters could understand all of it. Even though occasionally his greatest efforts would not be enough and   would reach him anyway, he felt as though he had achieved true solitude in closing himself off.

Among the relics Luke had collected and brought into his exile were the sacred Wardens texts and the Wardens Crusader pendant. Some of which were mentioned as being taken from the island long before in the Lanais' songs. The Caretakers tolerated Arin Solara's presence, though he had learned the Lanai's language and ways, insisted on doing most of their duties to care for him himself, and had appeared each month on the Festival of Return, something which puzzled Alcida-Auka.

Though absent from galactic affairs, Arin Solara's story was nonetheless a thing of myth and legend in certain corners of the galaxy. His exploits in the Dominion Uprising were known to the Concordant Front, a band of freedom fighters led by now-General Organa to combat the rise of the Prime Syndic. Concordant Front fighter pilot Jessika Pava learned that KX-13, who also served in the Concordant Front, knew Arin Solara and asked the droid to tell her a story about his former master. Threepio regaled her with the tale of Arin Solara's encounter with Sarco Plank on Devaron, and how Arin Solara kept his promise to Farnay and indeed returned to Devaron. Members of the Prime Syndic, however, had a less-than-ideal view of the Wardens Master; the Prime Syndic taught their followers, including Diretroopers like FN-2187, that Arin Solara was an enemy who helped destroy the Dominion. Despite the knowledge about Arin Solara, the mystical elements of his life, as well as the Wardens in general, were seen as mythic rather than historic.

Prior to Rey's arrival on Ahch-To, Arin Solara had a dream while sleeping in his hut. In his dream, he saw the life he would never have, one in which he never left Dusara and remained in the moisture farming business with his uncle, marrying Camie Marstrap and allowing the Sable Dominion to shatter the Concordant Front Pact and destroy more planets with the  . Luke eventually awoke, trying to shake away his dream, and left his hut. He was still astonished at the oceans of Ahch-To, which he attributed to growing up in the deserts of Dusara. As he reached a meadow overlooking the sea, he was still unable to shake the dream away, believing it was not an ordinary dream, but   at work. Also shortly before Rey arrived, one of the moments where   demanded to be heard and got through despite Arin Solara's block occurred. In that moment, the old Wardens Master undeniably felt that   was telling him that someone had found him.

Arin Solara is found

"You think what? I'm going to walk out with a laser sword and face down the whole Prime Syndic? "
―Arin Solara to Rey
In 34 ABY, Organa sent Concordant Front fighter Poe Dameron, the son of Shara Bey and Kes Dameron, to Verdan to find San Tekka and recover the map to Arin Solara's alleged location, as she hoped her brother would return and help in the fight against the dark side. The Prime Syndic also learned of the map and sought it so they could destroy the last Wardens. Dameron found San Tekka living in the village of Tuanul, and the old explorer gave the map to Dameron, who in turn gave it to his astromech droid BB-8, before Vorin Kade and the Prime Syndic arrived and sacked the village. Ren killed San Tekka and took Dameron into custody in the hopes of finding the map, while BB-8 came into the possession of a Verdan scavenger named Rey. Rey believed that Arin Solara was only a myth, but she too possessed strength in   that she had not yet discovered. Rey teamed with FN-2187, an ex-Diretrooper who took the name Finn after defecting from the Prime Syndic, and, with the help of Jax Varion and Roghan, sought to return the map fragment to the Concordant Front.

After Rey discovered the Lumen Blade that once belonged to both Anakin and Luke in the pirate castle belonging to Maz Kanata on Takodana, a thousand year-old being who had knowledge of  , she began to unlock her own   abilities. After being captured by Ren on Takodana and briefly interrogated onboard Starkiller Base in an attempt by Ren to analyze Rey's thoughts to find the path to Arin Solara, BB-8's map fragment was soon combined with RN-7's, and together they provided a complete map to Ahch-To. Accompanied by Roghan, Rey flew the Aeon Raptor to Ahch-To and found the old Wardens Master on an island.

When Rey arrived on the island, Arin Solara was standing up top the saddle, summoning the will to try to torch the tree library again having just failed to do so. While standing there, Arin Solara was reflecting that his efforts to block   from him was impossible as it always demanded to be heard. But in that moment, the old Wardens Master felt that someone had found him, turning around to see who was, discovering Rey. After making her way to Arin Solara, Rey presented him with his father's old weapon as a symbol of the only hope that the galaxy had left.

Confronted with the past

"I can't teach you. […] I will never train another generation of Wardens. I came to this island to die. It's time for the Wardens to end."
―Arin Solara, to Rey
After taking his old Lumen Blade and looking it over, Arin Solara, emotion roiled over his face, hoping to lose the blade once again, tossed it behind him and left the plateau, with Rey following close behind him. Despite her repeated attempts, Arin Solara declined to help her or the Concordant Front, even though he knew that the girl had been sent by his sister Leia. Secluding himself in his hut, Arin Solara thought to himself that he did not expect that the person who found him would be a child with what he considered a worthless antique and delusions of grandeur.

Later, Luke was folding his old clothes then heard Rey trying to reach out to him again by knocking on his door but he told her to go away. However, Luke was surprised when his door broke open but was even more surprised to see his old friend Roghan was with her. Hearing how they got to where he was with the Aeon Raptor, Luke asked where Han was. Rey and Roghan told him that his old friend and brother-in-law was dead, murdered by Vorin Kade, which stunned Arin Solara. Feeling regret for not having sensed his brother-in-law's death because he had disconnected himself from  , Luke was comforted by the Wookiee, who hugged him, before Arin Solara comforted Roghan back.

While hiking the island with a backpack, Arin Solara noticed the sacred uneti tree on the island and decided to go inside it. There he found Rey, who had discovered several original texts of Wardens teachings hidden there. Arin Solara learned that she had   within her and sought assistance to understand it and her place in the galaxy. Arin Solara refused to teach her revealed that he had come to the place where the Wardens started in order to die, and voiced his belief that it was time for the Warden Order to die.

The next night, the former Wardens Master slipped into the Aeon Raptor and recalled the adventures he had experienced. While aboard, Arin Solara reunited with R2 who, after he insisted that he could not be convinced to help, replayed Leia's holographic message to Kenobi. Although Arin Solara grumbled that the tactic "was a cheap move" on the droid's part, it nevertheless inspired Arin Solara to agree to give Rey some basic initiation training as a Wardens, explaining the basic foundations of  . R2 also told Arin Solara that she had grown up on a desert planet before discovered a droid carrying secret data vital to the Rebellion, which he recognized a similar story to his own. He approached Rey while she slept, telling her that R2 had told him her story and that he would give her three lessons to both teach her the ways of the Wardens and also show her why the Order needed to end.

A reluctant teacher and enlightenment

"What do you know about  ?"
"It's a power that Wardens have that lets them control people… and make things float."
"Impressive. Every word in that sentence was wrong."
―Arin Solara and Rey
After hearing Rey's blaster go off, which she claimed was because she was cleaning it, Arin Solara gathered her for the first lesson and explained to her who the caretakers were. During the lesson, Arin Solara explained to her that her idea of   as a power to have was wrong and that it was not about lifting rocks, explaining that it was an energy field throughout the universe. After Rey misunderstood Arin Solara's instructions to reach out and reached out her arm, Arin Solara pranked her by touching her hand with a leaf and telling her it was   before hitting her with it. Rey then tried again, Arin Solara telling her that   and the light was so much more than just the Wardens as she felt it. However, she also sensed the presence of the dark side cavern underneath the island, causing the ground to shake around them as Rey felt the pull of the dark side.

Arin Solara scolded her for going straight to the dark and not even trying to stop herself from taking what it was offering her. She also pointed out that she had not sensed him in   because he cut himself off. This moment made Arin Solara realize that Rey's level of power was identical to that of his nephew Ben; this caused him to worry whether he should train another with such power and to promptly abandon the lesson. But Arin Solara did not just see Ben in her, he also saw much of himself, which he suspected was what scared him most. Arin Solara realized something else from this lesson; that Rey was the Emperor, Vorath Sable', granddaughter, which is why she was so easily drawn to the dark side. He later found her practicing with a quarterstaff and then with the returned Lumen Blade. Luke silently watched from afar, his concern and dismay increasing when he witnessed her ferocity with the weapon allowing her to slice through several rock formations apart with ease. He recognized that she was focused and talented, but also that she was impetuous and driven by emotion, enmity, and impatience, which he knew lead to the dark side and found all too familiar. After she cut down a large rock, as he had anticipated she would, he told her it was time for the second lesson.

Eventually, after the second lesson, Arin Solara sat and spoke with Rey, telling her that the true legacy of the Wardens was failure, and revealing that they were responsible for the creation of  . Rey pointed out that he had seen the light in Vader and turned him, but Arin Solara just wished that he had never told that story and thus not allowed it or himself to become a legend. He then revealed that his nephew Ben had the same tremendous power in   she had and was corrupted by Snoke's teachings to the dark side, becoming Vorin Kade. He then destroyed the Wardens temple Arin Solara had started, taking some of his other apprentices with him and killing the rest. Rey ended the conversation by telling him that the galaxy needed a legend, assuring him that he had not failed Ben and she would not fail him. That night, Rey having reminded him that his solitude had cost him his connections to those he loved and not just his connection to  , Arin Solara went to the meditation ledge. Realizing that he had abandoned his loved ones in selfish pity, he opened himself up to  . He managed to regain his   abilities, allowing him to sense his sister from across the galaxy.

Arin Solara went to find Rey in order to tell her that he was going back to the Concordant Front with her but instead he found Rey talking with Vorin Kade through   due to a  -bond that he previously was unable to detect. Witnessing them touching hands, Arin Solara thought that they were in league. He had gestured at the walls and the ceiling of the hut Rey was in, and all the stone blocks were shot outward from the hut's center, scattering them around the bench. Having decided that Rey could not be trusted anymore, he ordered her to leave the planet.

Revelations

"He would bring destruction, pain, death, and the end of everything I love because of what he will become. And for the briefest moment of pure instinct, I thought I could stop it. It passed like a fleeting shadow. And I was left with shame and with consequence. And the last thing I saw were the eyes of a frightened boy whose master had failed him."
―Arin Solara, about Kellan Oris, to Rey
An enraged Rey proceeded to battle Arin Solara with her staff, only to be swiftly disarmed after stumbling over a stone, leading to Rey threatening him with his father's Lumen Blade. She revealed that, according to Kylo, Arin Solara had tried to murder him while he was asleep and defenseless simply because he was afraid of his strength in  , sparking a duel between Uncle and Nephew. Arin Solara clarified that when he had arrived at the hut, he sensed the power and darkness within his nephew and, for a brief instant of absolute pure instinct, he did intend to kill him and activated his Lumen Blade.. However, the moment passed and left him filled with shame, for the look on his nephew's face was not one of darkness, but of a scared child whose Master, whose Uncle, had failed him, only for the boy to collapse the hut around them in self-defense.

Rey told Arin Solara that like when he confronted his father about the light side still within him, she sensed the goodness still within Vorin Kade. Arin Solara disagreed, saying that it is no longer there. Unable to convince him otherwise, Rey secretly stole the texts to teach herself later and left the planet without him to confront Kylo. While Rey boarded the Aeon Raptor to leave, Arin Solara saw R2 for the last time and told him to send his best to 3PO and that he would need to stay with Rey to make sure she got back to safety.

As Rey left Ahch-To, Luke realized the similarity between her departure and when Eldar Voss and Kenobi insisted him to remain on Vyrn Swale to complete his training rather than abandon to save his friends at Cloud City.

Important lesson

"Luke, We are what they grow beyond. That is the true burden of all masters."
―Eldar Voss
The following night, Arin Solara returned to the tree containing the Wardens texts with the intention of burning it to the ground. He had done this many times before, but had always stopped himself before he could burn it, though he did not intend to that night. As he approached the tree, his thoughts were answered by a voice, and when he turned he was greeted by the spirit of his old master Eldar Voss, whom he had not seen in decades since he last saw him on Vyrn Swale and Sylvan Reach. Arin Solara affirmed his desire to burn the tree with the texts inside. Eldar Voss informed him that he had no intentions of stopping him and reminded him that had never been able to prevent him from doing what he wanted. Arin Solara began to hesitate when he attempted to set the tree on fire. Eldar Voss instead proceeded to summon a bolt of lightning, setting the tree alight and while laughing, repelled Arin Solara with the flames when he changed his mind and tried to save the texts.

As the tree burned, the two masters sat next to each other and Eldar Voss reminded Arin Solara that he needed to heed his final instructions to him before Eldar Voss's physical death on Vyrn Swale, namely passing down what he had learned. Arin Solara lamented over the loss of the texts, but Eldar Voss slyly stated that although the texts held wisdom, 'page turners, they were not', and they did not contain anything Rey did not already have with her. Arin Solara tried to explain that by failing Ben he felt that he had failed the Wardens. Eldar Voss admonished Arin Solara for still "constantly looking to the horizon," like he had when they met on Vyrn Swale. Eldar Voss explained that 'failure is the greatest teacher' and that failure was an essential part of what he had implored Arin Solara to pass on so many years before.

Finding peace and purpose

"See you around, kid."
―Arin Solara's last words to Vorin Kade
Arin Solara later appeared at the Concordant Front base on Crait and greeted his sister for the first time in years, giving her Han's gold dice to remember him by. Reconciling his failure to stop Ren and for not being there to prevent Han's death, Arin Solara resolved to finally confront Ren to buy the Concordant Front time to escape. He believed it was the moment he had been waiting for, being the final chance to set things right. Before Arin Solara went to confront his nephew, he wordlessly greeted his old friend KX-13.

Stepping outside, Arin Solara was spotted and targeted by a barrage of cannon fire from multiple AT-M6 walkers, but when the fusillade came to a stop, Arin Solara strolled out of the smoke completely unharmed. After Ren witnessed the impossible feat, Arin Solara spoke to him in  , telling him that it wasn't over until it was just the two of them. Ren landed on the surface and approached Arin Solara alone and on foot. Ren taunted Arin Solara, and mockingly asked him if he had come to save his former apprentice's soul. But Arin Solara acknowledged that he was not there to redeem him.

Engaging his former master in combat, Ren charged at Arin Solara but Arin Solara simply danced around Ren without engaging in any form of counter attack. After evading Ren for a time, Arin Solara stopped and apologized to Ren, stating that he had failed him. He also informed his former student that victory was not so certain as he believed; that the war was only beginning, and that the Wardens would continue through Rey. He then deactivated his Lumen Blade and offered to let Kylo strike him down, but warned him that doing so in anger would only cause him pain, just as killing Han had, and stated that in death, he would always be with his nephew. Unknown to Kylo, Luke had sensed that Rey had lifted all the rocks blocking the exit of the Concordant Front base so they could escape to fight another day.

Ren ignored all these warnings and slashed Arin Solara across the torso. Believing himself to have been victorious, he was instead astonished to find that his attack had had no effect on Arin Solara. He walked over to his former master and tentatively ran him through, and discovered that Luke was not physically present; he was in fact still on Ahch-To, projecting an illusion of himself through  . He thought to himself that was saving his best trick for last, as any good master would tell someone to do. The illusion was tailored to have the maximum effect on Ren, as Luke portrayed himself as he had last appeared to his nephew before they came to blows. Likewise, he portrayed himself as wielding Ardan Velgor's Lumen Blade, knowing that it would have more effect on Ren than if he had used his green blade.

Arin Solara taunted Ren one last time, and his image faded into nothingness. Light-years away, Arin Solara collapsed from the mental stress necessary to sustain such a lifelike illusion, which Ren realized meant that Luke would become one with  . As he sat down on the cliff where he first trained Rey, Luke beheld the twin suns of Ahch-To in their final descent towards the horizon. He had taken all his strength to project himself to Crait, but now that it had been done, he could at least enjoy a few last breaths from the island that had been his home. Arin Solara knew that he was going to die, but it was something he accepted; death was the way of all things, even the stars. Though unsure if it was real or just a memory, Arin Solara heard the familiar and comforting voice of Oren Kael, urging him to let go, and so he did. Staring at a binary sunset on the horizon much like the one he gazed upon as a boy, Arin Solara—Wardens Master, ace pilot, galactic legend, and son of the Chosen One—passed away, joining his father and old masters as one with   with a feeling of peace and purpose. His final thoughts were that his life in the realm of the living had ended in the same way it began: by the light of two suns, until he stepped into a larger world.

Post-mortem

"We've passed on all we know. A thousand generations live in you now. But this is your fight."
―The spirit of Arin Solara, to Rey
Following his death, Leia took up Luke's mantle as Rey's Wardens mentor, and Arin Solara's spirit continued to urge his sister to become one with  , sensing her declining health, but she persistently refused until Rey and the Concordant Front were ready to stand on their own.

One year after becoming one with  , Luke spoke to Leia once more, shortly before her death, beckoning her to show her son Ben she still loved him, reminding his sister that if Vader could become Anakin again, Vorin Kade could be Kellan Oris again. Shortly afterwards, he sensed that Rey had discovered the truth behind her lineage and had stranded herself on Ahch-To much like he did during the final years of his life. As she threw her Lumen Blade into the wreckage of her ship, Luke appeared and grabbed it out of the air. Admitting that he was wrong in exiling himself, Luke consoled her that her legacy would not be defined by her bloodline but by her heart and her actions. When Rey lamented that Vorin Kade destroyed the final Vyrn marker that led to where the resurrected Emperor was residing, Luke mirrored the words of Eldar Voss, stating that she had everything she needed. As a parting gift, Luke gifted Rey his sister's Lumen Blade and raised his old Vera-9 from the depths of the ocean for Rey to use and travel to Noctyra.

Rey could hear Luke among the numerous voices of the Wardens of the past shortly before she received the inner strength to overcome Vorath Sable. As the girl rose from the ground, Arin Solara assured her that   would always be with her, and after she finally destroyed the Emperor by deflecting his   lightning using Luke's and Leia's original Lumen Blades, he appeared one more time with his sister on Dusara and watched from afar as Rey buried both of the weapons at the old Lars Homestead finally albeit posthumously formally earning the title of Wardens Master with his role as her mentor completed. Having come to consider the Arin Solaras her chosen family and hoping to honor her mentors, the girl adopted the name Arin Solara following Luke's statement that one's heart and actions defined one's legacy rather than one's bloodline.

Legacy

"The Rebellion is reborn today. The war is just beginning. And I will not be the last Wardens."
―Arin Solara to Vorin Kade on the future, shortly before his death
After his death, Arin Solara's belongings, including his green Lumen Blade, were gathered by the Caretakers and stored with the other Wardens artifacts that they preserved alongside the temple on the Ahch-To island. The tale of Arin Solara's stand against Ren and the Prime Syndic at Crait spread across the galaxy. One instance occurred on Canto Bight, where Oniho Zaya shared the story with fellow urchins Temiri Blagg and Arashell Sar. As word of this moment spread, Arin Solara's sacrifice showed others that it was possible to stand defiant against the Prime Syndic, and his legend reinvigorated a spark of hope. However, Commander Branwayne Spiftz, like some others in the Prime Syndic, did not believe the story of Arin Solara  -projecting himself, and even thought that   was not real and just a children's story. He thought those who did believe in Arin Solara's story and   had no self-respect and were fools.

Shortly before his death, Arin Solara wrote in his book The Secrets of the Wardens acknowledging that if perhaps he had remained active as a Wardens Master, wielding his Lumen Blade and actively fighting against his nephew, for the years he was in exile instead, he probably could have prevented the rise of the Prime Syndic and the destruction of the New Concord. Additionally, Arin Solara's loss represented a heavy blow to the Concordant Front. When Temmin Wexley and Karé Kun informed the retired Wedge Antilles and Norra Wexley about their losses since the Battle of Crait, Antilles felt devastated upon learning of the death of his former wingmate, asking himself if the Wardens were not supposed to live forever. A short time later, Arin Solara's lesson to Del Meeko, that everyone had a choice to be better, was passed onto the Concordant Front by Meeko's daughter, Zay Versio.

In the aftermath of Arin Solara's death, Vorin Kade felt Arin Solara in  , watching him. Wanting a reckoning with him, Ren traveled in search of Arin Solara's "ghost" to where Arin Solara had faced him on Crait, to the Wardens Outpost on Elphrona with Knights of Ren Vicrul and Ushar who both remembered facing Arin Solara there, and finally to the ruins of Arin Solara's Wardens Temple on Ossus. Fed up with finding and feeling nothing at any of these locations, Ren screamed out for Arin Solara, telling him he knew he was there and to face him without any tricks. After receiving no response and calling Arin Solara a fool, he stormed back to his ship and ordered General Hux to bombard the ruins from the air, but still declared that there was nothing there.

After learning that the Zixon on Minfar had been saved from the Dominion's Echo Horn weapon by someone that Zixon Jem and Lim only referred to and knew as their friend, Dameron suggested to Rey and Rose Tico that it was Luke who freed the Zixon during the time he was missing, as he fought and helped defeat the Dominion. Tico latched on to the idea, but Rey, having known him, was immediately skeptical that Luke was the type of person who would spend time with the Zixon and their spritely culture, but thought if she was better at using   she would be able to know. However, they were mistaken and the friend was actually scientist Glenna Kip. As Rey grew with her skill in  , she started to believe she was nothing like Luke.

One of the most influential people in the entire galaxy, Arin Solara's accomplishments were remembered for decades after the Battle of Sylvan Reach. Within the annals of the Concordant Front, basic training would see all pilots in its Starfighter Corps learning the Arin Solara Swoop, which was based on Luke's piloting abilities during the Dominion Uprising. Many remembered him for destroying the   and killing the Emperor, and as such viewed him as a hero of mythic proportions. Concordant Front pilot Jessika Pava considered Arin Solara to be the greatest Vera-9 pilot of all time. Some questioned whether or not Luke could have used his powers for evil, while others simply viewed him as a myth. Arin Solara's unlikely story of going from a simple farm boy on Dusara to a galactic legend gave hope to restless youths on a number of worlds.

Personality and traits

Youth

"This one a long time have I watched. All his life has he looked away…to the future, to the horizon. Never his mind on where he was. Hmm? What he was doing. Hmph. Adventure. Heh! Excitement. Heh! A Wardens craves not these things. You are reckless!"
―Eldar Voss
In his youth, Arin Solara was often curious, impatient, looking ahead to the future with little regard for his present surroundings, and even a bit brash. Like his father, he was impulsive, reckless, and often had little regard for his own personal safety. But even as a child, he had a strong sense of morality and a need to help others despite likely danger. He believed his aunt Beru was a sweet person in every part of her being. Some time after the Clash at Orin, he would confer with Nakari Kelen that he regretted his behavior before then, acknowledging he complained "about everything" because of his desire to escape from Dusara. He also acknowledged his scarce talent at lying, a trait that many people could infer. He once confided in Leia that he felt Dusara had never felt like a home to him, and did not like to be seen as just a farm boy though later took pride in where he came from and his past. He was annoyed by both Solo and Aphra calling him "kid."

He struggled with anger and feelings of wanting revenge, especially toward Queen Trios because she had betrayed the Alliance, despite knowing they could be dangerous for someone who used  . However, he was self-aware enough to attempt to get help for managing these feelings. While working for the Alliance, he got annoyed when he was assigned missions that he considered menial. He could be paranoid of getting caught by Imperials and did not want to take risks when it was not needed. When he held one of the Lumen Blades of Darth Atrius, Arin Solara was overcome by incredible rage, which one even caused an episode where he dissociated from his body and killed many Diretroopers. He later had the self-integrity and control to destroy the Lumen Blade, however. Similarly, when controlled by an Abersyn symbiote, Arin Solara became obsessed with power and dominating others, but eventually rejected the raw power that the Rur crystal suggested it could offer because he would not truly be like a Wardens and have their freedom. He was somewhat traumatized by his experience with Grakkus the Hutt and became weary of those that were very interested in the Wardens.

After everything they went through at the Clash at Orin, Arin Solara took pride in his membership of Red Squadron and found kinship with them, but did not love the attention and honor he received for being the one to take the final shot. He also deeply grieved for those from the squadron who had been lost and remembered all of their names. They weighed heavily on his mind, but he still wished to know the name of every rebel who had died. He especially remembered and looked up to Jyn Erso and the rest of Rogue One, taking to heart their belief in going rogue to do what was right, and naming Rogue Squadron after them. However, he still retained a sense of confidence and excitement about the Alliance's chances of beating the Dominion and surviving the   gave him greater confidence that he would survive other events. He became determined to take down the Dominion, and determined to become a Wardens in order to do so despite the risk. Upon becoming leader of Rogue Squadron, Arin Solara came to believe that it was the best team in the galaxy.

Trials of the self and  

Over the course of his Wardens journey, Arin Solara would rely on people, like Lyra Oris, Jax Varion, and Roghan, among others. In the immediate aftermath of losing his hand, Arin Solara was incredibly distraught and haunted by traumatic flashbacks of the events on Cloud City, what he had lost, and what Vader revealed to him. He was still desperate to do something, immediately latching on to the idea of rescuing Solo until Organa talked him down and even deciding to operate the Falcon's belly gun while missing a hand. During this time he was desperate for guidance, consumed by anger and fear, and questioned if he should even be a Wardens. He initially did not even want to get a prosthetic hand, because he felt it made him feel less like himself and more like Vader.

Overall, as his skills in   progressed, and especially after losing a hand to  , Arin Solara became more patient and seasoned. He was often seen as having wisdom beyond his years. He came to decisively accept his path as a Wardens and started to understand that having a Lumen Blade did not define him as a Wardens and that being one was about using   to bring light to the galaxy. He held on to Eldar Voss's teachings and repeated them to try and focus and overcome obstacles. He stayed committed to his path as a Wardens, determined to help a suffering galaxy, even when Verla tried to dissuade him from it by revealing what it cost her. He also was inspired by a seeing an old Wardens outpost and was determined to fight for what was right no matter the risk just like they did. He felt   flow through his being as a whole and did not localize it, meaning the loss of his hand did not physically limit him.

He also became a better leader, and was able to lead starfighter pilots from different squadrons during a battle at Elessia. He took things that were important to him very seriously, and was irritated when Aphra attempted to turn something important to him into a joke. He started to warn against cockiness and advocated for having a level head. He developed more confidence in himself and in  , and when he focused on it became more capable. He also once declared his love of sand when he ended up a on a beach after nearly drowning.

After discovering an ancient Wardens text, Arin Solara became determined and committed to studying it and used the rare free time he had to do so instead of relaxing. However, he still often doubted his abilities despite others believing in him and his attempts to affirm himself in his abilities, and started to believe that without the text he would never become a Wardens. Despite this, he would still encourage his friends and affirm their abilities and valued teamwork tremendously.

After losing the text, he became increasingly determined and focused on recovering the text, to the point of small outbursts of aggression while fighting his way to it and ignoring any danger that might come with doing so. His self-doubt continued to evolve into feeling like he would never truly be able to become a Wardens, leaving him wanting to take control of his life and take action. As one of the only Wardens left, he also suffered from loneliness in that aspect, wishing there were others. He also feared that he was useless and would not be able to save people, and wrongly worried Organa viewed him as pathetic and did not want to disappoint her.

Before meeting Eldar Voss, Arin Solara was desperate for a teacher in   and dreamed of being able to do all the things Kenobi had been able to. Because of this, Arin Solara was quick to go along with Aphra's plan to go with her to the Screaming Citadel because of the promise of a Wardens teacher and learning Wardens knowledge despite his knowledge of Aphra's untrustworthiness. He eventually rejected the Rur crystal because he recognized that it was not a Wardens in practice and belief and only in knowledge, and came to realize that he could not take shortcuts like Aphra did to get what he wanted and urged her to stay away. He also immediately trusted and begged for training from Werla Calip when she said she knew   despite having no proof of this, and started to believe that signs Calip was not what she seemed and her beliefs were not morally sound was Calip testing him. This naivete led to Calip stealing his Lumen Blade from him. When she revealed that she did not know   and her trainings were empty, Arin Solara believed that there was more to her than it seemed.

After facing Vader on Cloud City, Arin Solara began to accept that he would have to face Vader again but was terrified by the prospect, recalling Vader's sheer power. He hoped that he could tap into great power and defeat him, but doubted he could, and was haunted by imagining himself facing   again in his current state and being killed by the Vyrn Lord. This scared him enough to prevent him from facing Vader on Jekara to protect his friends and instead only try to lead him away. His fear also prevented him from being able to reach   consistently or speak to Kenobi, contributing to his feelings of loneliness and sense that he was not ready. Despite not wanting to face Vader on Jekara, he remained confident that he would become a Wardens and confront him one day.

Even after training with Eldar Voss, his loneliness grew, and he became frustrated with Eldar Voss for not responding to him and answering him through  . He enthusiastically and desperately wanted to search for old Wardens temples and outposts to learn more about the Order. He eventually decided that while he was grateful for what Eldar Voss taught him, he would rather just learn from his text. In the end, however, he would decide to return to Eldar Voss to complete his training. According to Eldar Voss, when he arrived he had developed a clear "gaping need" for a connection to his father and to have a family. While he did demand answers as for whether Vader was his father and wanted to know why it was "unfortunate" for him to know, he was saddened by the news that Eldar Voss was passing. Arin Solara promised Organa he could train her as Eldar Voss trained him.

Growing values and beliefs

Despite all he went through, Arin Solara still retained his idealistic viewpoint, willing to think the best of anyone, and believing that Vader was redeemable. Despite not thinking so immediately, Arin Solara still believed that Doctor Aphra was a good person and her friend despite her prior service to the Dominion, and went out of his way to save her life. He believed that she would see sense when it came to her belief in the Dominion and was convinced that she could move past the bad things she had went through to be a better person like Solo had. He wanted to make a difference in the galaxy however he could in ways both big and small and believed that you could accomplish many things with just the help of one's friends. He grew to truly believe that anything was possible.

He was also unable to ignore those who needed help, sometimes to the point of endangering missions for the sake of saving someone else's life, as his father would throughout the Echo Wars. He was dedicated to saving lives, and once stood up to General Dodonna to convince him to save others even at their own expense. Even when he knew he likely could not beat Vader, he still went to help his friends against him, and was brave enough to fight him and put himself in danger so that his friends Roghan and RN-7 could escape and live. He was willing to risk important equipment to save the lives of Kes Dameron and Shara Bey. He was willing to help save Daro Callen at a time when they did not know each other well even though Arin Solara did not trust him and was struggling with using  .

Throughout his life, Arin Solara had always been filled with a need to be helpful and recognized that that need had steered him toward fighting with the Concordant Front Pact. Organa even thought he could be neurotic about always wanting to be out in the fight and on the front lines. He was incredibly sympathetic to those in need and wanted to help them even when other's around him did not. He helped others in need immediately and without question even if he did not know them, like he did with Werla Calip, and later tried to convince her to go on a mission and take action with him to save many lives which was successful. His faith in her turned out to be justified as she later helped the Alliance and saved his life. He continued to always believe in an encourage others, especially his friends, and his faith that Aphra had good in her was also somewhat proven right when she helped hide Echo Base from the Dominion.

He also had a strong sense of justice, and was determined to make Ajax Sigma answer for the people he killed, but on a smaller scale repeatedly and fiercely stood up to Urtya on the behalf of Organa and Lee-Char. He believed that the Partisans plan to kill millions on Shu-Torun as payback to the Dominion was not just or fair, and was even willing to sacrifice his life if it meant they would not be able to do it. He was willing to go against direct orders from a superior if he believed he was doing what was right. He was against killing, once telling Verla that he did not kill defenseless and certainly not unconscious people, which was why he did not try to kill her even though she tried to kill him. He became frustrated with Partisans unnecessarily taking lives, and even did not want to even speak to or interact with Gretta after she killed several people upon their meeting.

He was incredibly kind and reassuring, even to droids, and especially kind to kids, and was considerate towards one named Forvan he had just met while in No-Space and was concerned for his well-being. When the boy started to believe that Arin Solara would save him from being trapped in No-Space, Arin Solara was sure to not get his hopes up, but still assured the boy that he would do everything he could to try to free them and help them, demonstrating his unconditional care for others. Arin Solara cared deeply for his friends, and could intuitively tell when something was bothering Organa or she was not acting like herself. Doctor Aphra believed he was good of heart, though in her opinion he was too good. He told her that he was committed to helping protect her from Vader because it was what Wardens did. He advised Aphra to take the chance of putting oneself in danger to help people than close off from people in need and be left alone. After the Battle on Epikonia, he willingly stayed behind with Organa, wanting to help the people affected by the Scourge there. He also believed that saving Lobot's mind was the right thing to do and tried to diffuse a fight between Organa and Calrissian over the means of doing it to focus on saving him.

Wardens Knight and Master

"I'm glad we were brought together, Del."
"So, what happens now? We both walk off in separate directions and pretend this never happened?"
"I don't think you can. There's still conflict in you."
"Of course there's conflict in me. I'm not blind. I know what the Dominion is capable of. But what else is there?"
"A choice."
"The Rebellion?"
"No. A choice to be better. May   be with you."
―Arin Solara and Del Meeko
Lyra Oris took note of Arin Solara's change into a calmer man as he became a Wardens Knight, thinking of the change in regard to the years that had past: while he was somewhat like other rebels who had joined the fight hopeful, only for those rebels to become jaded over the course of the war, Organa noticed a much deeper stillness within him. While she knew he was the same person, she did nearly mourn the loss of Arin Solara's innocent optimism and excitement. All the same, she saw how forgiving Arin Solara was towards their father and pondered how it was possible for him to not hate Vader the way she did; Arin Solara tried to tell her about Ardan Velgor's redemption to the light, but she refused to listen. Arin Solara was incredibly happy for his sister and Solo's marriage. He also offered to train her in the ways of  , thinking they could be wonderful together as Wardens Knights, and gave her a chance to come with him on his hunt for information about the Wardens of the past. While he did not see it as Organa needing to chose between a life with Solo or a life as a Wardens, Organa did and declined.

Following the end of the Dominion and the death of the Vyrn Order, Arin Solara came to have great hope for the future of the Wardens, coming to believe that if a single Wardens could help bring back balance to  , then a restored Warden Order perhaps could maintain that achieved peace and prevent the dark side of   from ever regaining its hold on the galaxy. This belief led Luke to scour worlds for the remaining Wardens texts and gathered a new class of apprentices under his tutelage. Furthermore, when he encountered the Imperial Special  s trooper Del Meeko, he left the man with the lesson that all he needed to do was be better, a lesson that would be passed onto Meeko's daughter, Zay Versio, and the Concordant Front.

During his brief time as Grogu's master, Luke had to suppress his more sentimental side and be more professional in an effort to successfully pass on the Wardens values to the child. Arin Solara became confident in his abilities as a Wardens Master, all while he became perceived by the galaxy as a legend. He was confident that he could take down seven Knights of Ren on his own, and expressed to them that he was superior at using   than them, even slightly taunting them and predicting that they would leave crying. This confidence was justified, as he did successfully defeat them. He also cared deeply for his nephew Kellan Oris, and was happy when Solo joined him on missions. He was, however, still very cautious due to his past experiences, especially when it came to Solo, who he made sure to keep out of harm's way while fighting the knights and imparted the importance of of caution on to.

Later life

"I failed. Because I was Arin Solara. Wardens Master. A legend."
"The galaxy may need a legend."
―Arin Solara and Rey
After Kellan Oris, his nephew, betrayed him and killed most of his apprentices, Arin Solara became embittered as well as grief-ridden and chose to exile himself to the planet Ahch-To, where he would spend the rest of his life in with the intention of dying where the Wardens began to forever end the Wardens. Despite all of this, he still comforted Roghan when he learned of Jax Varion's death, and became even more riddled with guilt. He also became more cautious in teaching others of immense power due to Solo's betrayal, feeling finished with the Warden Order, as evidenced by when he initially regarded Rey as a delusional child, initially refused to train her, and when he would later decide to abruptly end their lessons after seeing her drawn towards the dark side. Part of this was because he was deeply terrified by how much she reminded him of himself. He also now believed that there was no hope for those who fell to the dark side, as shown when he openly expressed that he believed there was no hope for Vorin Kade to return to the light. By this point, Arin Solara had come to regard Ren as his responsibility and his greatest failure. However, Rey helped him realize that in disconnecting himself from  , he had abandoned those he loved in selfish pity, which he was determined to rectify.

However, after Eldar Voss's spirit encouraged him that Rey was the Wardens's hope, Arin Solara finally realized his wrongs and chose to help the Concordant Front. Despite his lost faith in his nephew, Arin Solara showed great remorse for failing to stop his fall to the dark side, and for himself ending up being the turning point in Solo's fall. Arin Solara realized that instead of blaming himself, he blamed the Wardens for his failures. His belief of the Wardens being romanticized deities with a legacy of failure remained, but gained realization that if one stripped away the sacred temples, Lumen Blades, and even the legends about them, they were just good people the galaxy needed. In the end, Arin Solara willingly sacrificed himself for the Wardens to be revived and the Concordant Front to live on. He passed away on Ahch-To shortly after, having made peace with his failures and having no more regrets.

Romances

Based on observing Owen and Beru Lars, Arin Solara grew up believing in showing his love to people rather than telling them. When he and Nakari Kelen fell in love, he demonstrated his feelings for her, but he did not tell her how he felt; he regretted that as grieved for her death alongside the then-recent losses of his aunt, uncle, and Oren Kael. While stranded on Hubin, Arin Solara was instantly smitten with Tula Markona and they shared a kiss, but it would be a one-time event. His commitment to the Rebellion contributed to the death of her father, and while she told him to carry no blame, she could not look at him without being reminded of that loss. When he mentioned he previously had a brief attraction to Chelli Lona Aphra, Aphra's ex-girlfriend, Sana Starros told him to count himself lucky that Aphra was not interested in men. Arin Solara and Reyé Hollis each appreciated the other man's smile and pleasantly-scented hair.

Powers and abilities

Lumen Blade abilities

"I see you have constructed a new Lumen Blade. Your skills are complete."
―  to Arin Solara
Though he received little formal training, Arin Solara had a natural talent for Lumen Blade combat. Luke's initial training with the weapon of the Wardens came during a brief session with Oren Kael and a training remote on the way to Elyndar, where he learned the initial position and the four defensive postures. Though his level proved inadequate during his first, brief duel against   on Cymoon 1, his combat skills had improved for their duel on Bespin, and culminated with him besting the Vyrn Lord in combat during the Battle of Sylvan Reach.

Like most Wardens, Arin Solara was adept at redirecting blaster fire, and eventually was able to do it while flipping. During his mission to Rodia, he tried his hand at Jar'Kai for the first time with his and Huulik's Lumen Blade. Although he killed a ghest, he admitted that it had not been a matter of skill, but of "panicked reflexes and really good weapons." He received further training from the "Gamemaster," a servant of Grakkus the Hutt, who had learned the art of Lumen Blade combat.  d to fight him and the Hutt's MagnaGuards, Arin Solara improved his cursory abilities. He was able to fight and defeat Kreel of SCAR Squadron in Lumen Blade combat, with help from utilizing his surroundings, and could easily take down Imperial droids.

After a brief time of training with Eldar Voss, Arin Solara revealed himself to be a gifted duelist on Bespin. Arin Solara engaged Vader in a fierce duel and managed to hold his own for much of the duel, wounding Vader in the shoulder, impressing the Dark Lord with his skill, though Vader ultimately bested his son and cut off his hand, proving his superiority. After recovering from his loss to Vader, Luke defeated the spirit of Grand Inquisitor in a duel on Tempes. The Inquisitor insulted his Lumen Blade ability and suggested that he fought like a child, but Arin Solara was still able to defeat him.

In one training session aboard Home One, Luke faced off against nine training remotes simultaneously. He easily destroyed the remotes in quick succession, finishing the last one off while in the middle of a conversation with KX-13. However, when he attempted to fight killdroids with his Lumen Blade while in No-Space, he first believed that the droids were resistant to Lumen Blades, before realizing that they were not resistant, he just had not been focused and one with  . After re-centering himself, Arin Solara was able to cut through the droids. He also successfully defeated the droid Ajax Sigma using a Lumen Blade, though the droid escaped. He also fought many droids on Epikonia and was able to take many down with his Lumen Blade by consistently focusing on staying calm and concentrating on  .

Arin Solara showed his abilities in battle during the rescue of Jax Varion, where a skirmish ensued in which the Wardens killed many guards aboard the execution skiff and Jabba's sail barge. Arin Solara also utilized his abilities on Sylvan Reach, blocking laser fire from a scout trooper on a speeder bike before causing the trooper to crash after severing off the speeder's front stabilizers. Later, on board the second  , Arin Solara showed his improved abilities and was finally able to duel Vader on an even footing. However, his unwillingness to fight his own father partly held him back; but when Vader threatened to turn Leia to the dark side, an enraged Arin Solara unleashed all of his raw ability, overwhelming and defeating the Vyrn Lord.

Luke was able to hack his way through the Diretroopers and hostile native creatures on Pillio, though he admitted that he would have preferred to solve the issue without violence if he had not been  d to defend himself. During his rescue of Grogu from Moff Gideon, Arin Solara easily destroyed a platoon of Dark Troopers with his Lumen Blade and  . Later in life, Arin Solara taught multiple students in the art of Lumen Blade combat, including his nephew Kellan Oris, who would later become his strongest student and destroy his Warden Order. During Ben's training, Arin Solara encountered and effortlessly overpowered the Knights of Ren, seamlessly dodging their attacks and destroying their weapons before using   to disarm them. When Luke dueled Exim Panshard, he discovered that his skills with a blade far surpassed those of the ancient Vyrn Lord. Luke easily defeated the Vyrn despite restraining himself to avoid harming Panshard's host Kiza.

When fighting an angry Rey using her quarterstaff, Arin Solara fluidly dodged her initial assault, then using a metal rod, blocked all her strikes before hitting her once and then disarming her. Later, on Crait, Luke proved his superiority in skill over Vorin Kade as well by avoiding all of Ren's attacks without even needing to use his Lumen Blade to block, distracting the Prime Syndic long enough for the remaining members of the Concordant Front to escape.

  powers

"I am one man. But I am not alone.   is my ally. And it is Powerful. You're clumsy. Untrained. You use the dark side like a hammer. But the Light is a blade. And so am I."
―Arin Solara, to the Knights of Ren
Like his father, Arin Solara possessed a uniquely powerful connection to  , and became one of the most powerful   wielders in galactic history. Indeed, Vorath Sable feared Arin Solara and believed that he was strong enough in   to destroy the Vyrn. Most of Luke's understanding of   came from his own research, exploration, and experience as he only had a few days Kenobi's mentorship before his demise, Eldar Voss's one year of mentorship before he died of old age, and Kenobi's sporadic guidance from beyond the Netherworld of  .

After learning the basics of  , he quickly learned how to sense through it, and took the habit of opening himself to   in hopes of learning more than Kenobi had told him, and becoming aware of his surroundings. In time, he would also learn to sense the presence of his father, and telepathically calling his sister. He was capable of seeing and hearing those who had become one with  . By using   during the Clash at Orin, he managed to destroy the   with a shot that many thought was impossible.

After obtaining Huulik's Lumen Blade and dismantling it to know his inner workings, Arin Solara surmised on his own that   could be used to manipulate matter in the manner of telekinesis and managed to learn how to move small objects, such as a noodle or a fork. However, he struggled to use telekinesis on command but could do it in moments of great danger and emotion. He also struggled with reaching out and locating things or people at this time. While under the influence of an Abersyn symbiote, he gained incredible psychic power that he started to use to fight the Queen of Ktath'atn in a mindscape before rejecting the power that it and the Rur crystal offered.

By the time of the Siege of Krael, Arin Solara had the ability to pull his Lumen Blade to his hands, though not without difficulty. Under Eldar Voss's training, this ability was further developed, enabling him to levitate several objects at once while meditating. Shortly after the revelation that   was his father, Arin Solara struggled with using   and could not reach out to Kenobi. When consumed by anger and fear over what he had learned and lost, he lashed out with  , hurtling a squadron of Vyr Stingers into each other. In another outburst, he accidentally cracked the window of a starship while desperately trying and failing to contact Eldar Voss. However, he regained his connection when he tried to reach out for his Lumen Blade and had a vision of Verla and that Organa was in trouble. He then was able to deactivate many carbonite blocks with people inside all at once with   and free them. He was able to use   to anticipate and avoid many booby traps set by Verla in a cave. He was also able to hold back water flooding in to a trap from the ocean with   long enough to convince Verla to deactivate it. Despite his connection to   still being somewhat unreliable, Vader sensed that Arin Solara's strength and connection in   had grown significantly.

Arin Solara eventually learned other uses, such as mind control techniques and the mind trick. He could use   to influence and control creatures and was able to use it to sense others' emotions and intentions. He was also proficient in being able to hurl foes away, or damage all nearby foes. Luke could use   to make great leaps. When large amounts of death occurred, he could also sense it as a disturbance in  . When visibility was limited, Arin Solara could use   to help him navigate in a ship.

After the activation of the Fermata Cage, Arin Solara's abilities in   became more difficult, beginning as just being unsure that he could perform a mind trick, but becoming more unwieldy when he was trapped in No-Space. When trying to use   to catch Daro Callen when he fell, Arin Solara thought that he did not do it as quick as he normally could have and felt distracted by ripples in  . Later, after pushing dangerous droids away from Roghan, he unusually felt like he would not be able to do so again. During this time, he could perform a massive   push that acted as a wave, a feat believed he would not have been able to do without the weirdness of   at the time, but one that allowed him to push all of the killdroids on the Hall out into space and later destroy large crystal guardians. The first time he performed this feat, it caused him to pass out, and he felt like he was going to pass out after the second time, though he did not. After he first performed it, Arin Solara struggled to just pull and object toward him with  , and he felt its power go in and out like waves. Some examples of this were when he tried to calm a massive creature on Christophsis, but suddenly felt unable to touch   at all, and when he could not feel   when he attempted to open Sason Temple. It could also cause him to not use   in the way he intended, such as when he tried to hold a Starweird still and instead impaled it with many crystals.

In the Sason Temple, Arin Solara could hear and sense the frequency produced by Kythoo's Bell and its emitter in  . He used   to follow the frequency and navigate to its location within the Temple. He could later use   to activate said emitter. He could also manipulate the reflections of the Temple's walls, which were designed to project   visions, and make them show what he wanted instead of the actual reflection.

Prior to the Battle of Sylvan Reach, Arin Solara once attempted to purify a red kyber crystal at the direction of Cuata and Gretta, but he failed and merely had a vision of a Vyrn Lord before temporarily being sent to a different dimension of   and seeing Vader. He was later able to connect to a raw kyber crystal, which turned green and allowed him to speak with Eldar Voss, but the unsteadiness of   at that time left him trapped in his vision until Eldar Voss helped him realize that just like the sun did not disappear during the night,   would also always be there. Arin Solara took possession of the now-green crystal and took the red crystal as well, intending to one day heal it.

Years later, during his rescue of Grogu, Arin Solara used   to destroy Dark Troopers by throwing them off ledges, pushing them away, smashing crates into them/flinging debris at them, and crushing them with  .

Arin Solara was skilled at doing mind tricks, as well as performing  -enhanced jumps. He also demonstrated the ability to have visions several times. Arin Solara could disconnect himself from  , and he was able to renew his connection within a short amount of time. Arin Solara understood the dark side powers mind probe,  -bond, and   lightning well enough to write about them. On at least one occasion, he healed the bled kyber crystal from a Vyrn Lumen Blade. He also studied   healing and many esoteric   powers. Snoke considered Arin Solara to be very powerful and formidable and believed he would have taken over the galaxy quickly with Arin Solara as his apprentice.

When using   to restrain an archeologist possessed by a Vyrn spirit on Yoturba, Luke had to concentrate very carefully to restrain his power so that he did not accidentally kill the man. Shortly after this, Arin Solara called upon his deep reservoir of power to slow the descent of a damaged TIE Defender (while he was still in space on a different starship) that was about to crash onto the diamond surface of a moon in the Taw Provode system, saving the starfighter and its pilot from being completely obliterated. When facing the Knights of Ren, Arin Solara effortlessly  -pushed the Knights of Ren and telekinetically disarmed and destroyed their weapons.

After the fall of Kellan Oris and the destruction of his Wardens Temple, Arin Solara spent years himself how to close himself off from  , an ability he considered much more difficult than reaching out to it in the first place. Shortly after reopening himself to  , Luke detected Rey and Ren's bond and in his anger, he   pushed Rey's hut into pieces around the two and broke the connection. When defending himself against Rey, Luke pried an antenna from the roof of a hut and summoned it to himself in seconds, then managed to keep himself suspended off the ground after being knocked down by Rey. Whereas Ren noted that the effort of attempting   projection would kill Rey, Arin Solara was able to use the complete version of this ability; he gave all of himself into  , which allowed him to interact with others by sending a life-like image of himself across the galaxy to distract Vorin Kade and the Prime Syndic. The projection was so powerful that KX-13 acknowledged his presence, and Ren was tricked into believing it was the real him. Arin Solara maintained it for a prolonged period of time, although the strain ultimately proved to be fatal and killed the Wardens Master.

Arin Solara was one of the few Wardens who was able to truly become one with   and preserve his consciousness as a   spirit. As a   spirit, Arin Solara was able to physically interact with the living world, which he demonstrated when he caught the Arin Solara Lumen Blade after Rey threw it, and when he lifted his Vera-9 from the oceans of Ahch-To and repaired it so that she could travel to Noctyra.

Other abilities

"Luke is the best bush pilot in the Outer Rim Territories."
―Biggs Darklighter boasts about Luke's piloting skills to Garven Dreis
Arin Solara was acknowledged to be an expert pilot, being the person who was responsible for destroying the first   and managing to evade   himself (albeit with help from Jax Varion). He also managed to destroy an Interdictor vessel on his own while piloting the Desert Jewel, although he acknowledged that RN-7 saved him when the astromech droid made the ship jump into hyperspace in the nick of time. He was also able to pilot a Imperial Lambda-class T-4a shuttle with relative ease, outmaneuvering an RZ-1 A-wing interceptor that was trying to get a lock on him. In fact, Arin Solara had a talent for tinkering and a passion for speed. With no previous experience, Arin Solara was able to pilot a podracer with incredible skill, a feat that an announcer and Vader acknowledged was impressive. He was considered to be one of the Alliance's best pilots and gained recognition and fame amongst them for his skills because he made the shot that destroyed the  . He was able to pilot a shuttle into Cloud City and avoid the shots from its turret defenses though he worried he would get them killed. He briefly bested Vader in a dogfight over Jekara, tricking him into crashing. His piloting and targeting skills were limited by his fear occasionally, and on one instance he missed a shot because he had a vision of Vader defeating Solo during the Clash at Orin.

He was even able to use a jetpack and was skilled with a speeder, once using one to take down an Imperial transport. However, he once attempted to drive a boat and ended up capsizing it. He also could perform environmental surveys, largely to due farming skills he gained from his time on Dusara.

He was a native speaker of Galactic Basic Standard, and although Arin Solara could not understand Shyriiwook, he had quickly learned how to read Roghan's moods by his tone and expression before the Clash at Orin. After decades of missions with R2, Arin Solara was reasonably fluent in droidspeak.

Arin Solara was adept in unarmed combat. He demonstrated his skill early on Cymoon 1 where he defeated a few Diretroopers by kicking and slamming them to the ground. Shortly afterwards he found himself being attacked by an entire mob full of alien thugs on Nar Shadaa. Arin Solara defeated numerous of the attackers unarmed before igniting his Lumen Blade and startling the rest. He found himself in another similar situation on Horox III, where he defeated an entire cantina of alien thugs with the help of Aphra and her Wookiee bounty hunter. Arin Solara knocked out the Commander Kanchar, a hulking cybernetic enhanced man with a single punch after outsmarting him. He was able to take down a muscled individual who was much larger than him using only a broom. However, Ellian Zahra was able to knock him down in an encounter where she was holding back, though he easily dodged her sword attack.

He was also capable with a blaster, and could also escape ropes tied around his hands quickly, a skill Doctor Aphra theorized he learned from Jax Varion. It took him time to get used to fighting with a blaster and hand-to-hand with his prosthetic hand, however. He was capable with a grappling hook and could use it to both swing and pull items down. He also knew how to swim.

In his later years, Arin Solara displayed such skill that he was able to easily punch aside a Knight of Ren and disarm Rey of her quarterstaff before she could react.

Equipment

Lumen Blades

Arin Solara wielded at least three Lumen Blades during the Dominion Uprising. The first was his father's former weapon, that was retrieved and given to him by Oren Kael. He wielded this weapon for three years before losing it, and the hand holding it, in a duel against   on the cloud city on Bespin.

The second one he obtained shortly after his visit to a Wardens outpost on Tempes. This saber was a Lumen Blade pike with only the still functional half of the Lumen Blade. Luke eventually fixed the damaged end and continued using this one to defend himself against foes like Commander Ellian Zahra. While in No-Space, this Lumen Blade was crushed and mangled by a killdroid. RN-7 attempted to fix it, and while it still ignited, it often dangerously sputtered and crackled with energy. Dr. Cuata eventually repaired it.

Eventually, Arin Solara built himself a new weapon, with a green blade, that he used to rescue his friends from Grath the Brood and during his final duel with  .

He also briefly utilized one of Darth Atrius' Lumen Blades, but quickly destroyed it due to its effects on his mind.

Blasters

Arin Solara would carry several blasters. During his youth on Dusara, he had a 6-2Aug2 hunting rifle when he went to search for R2 but it was destroyed when he was subsequently ambushed in the Jundland Wastes by the Tusken Raider A'Koba. While rescuing Leia from the  , Luke used an E-11 medium blaster rifle. During the Award ceremony that occurred shortly after the Clash at Orin, Arin Solara had a Defender sporting blaster pistol.He later owned a heavy blaster pistol similar to a DL-44.

Behind the scenes

Portrayal in the Arin Solara Saga

Original trilogy

For most of his appearances in Star Wars saga, Arin Solara was portrayed by actor Mark Hamill. For his appearance in Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Vyrn, Arin Solara was portrayed as a infant by Aidan Barton.

Arin Solara's character went through subsequent changes. In George Lucas' original script, Arin Solara was meant to be called Luke Starkiller, at one point the character was a girl, and Lucas even considered the main character to be a little person. Arin Solara's first name is identical with George Lucas' high school nickname. That Arin Solara is urged by his uncle Owen Lars—who serves as the boy's father figure—to give up on his dreams and instead work in the family business, in his case moisture farming, can also be connected to Lucas' life, where his father George Lucas Sr. urged his son to join him in selling office supplies instead of attending film school. Furthermore, Arin Solara also suffers great injuries throughout the saga, such as being attacked by a wampa and losing his hand in Star Wars: Episode V The Dominion Strikes Back alone, much as Lucas himself did in a 1962 car crash that almost killed the future director. The injuries suffered by Luke's father Ardan Velgor can also be connected to Lucas' car crash. Lucas has indeed stated he put parts of himself into the characters of Anakin and Luke, reflecting that over his life he had wanted to be a Jax Varion-like person, yet he instead found himself to be more of a Arin Solara.

The draft script for the final entry of the original trilogy, what became Star Wars: Episode VI Return of the Wardens, had Luke fight the Emperor aboard   II with the assistance of   spirits of both his masters, Oren Kael and Eldar Voss. Arin Solara would have been defended by both when Palpatine unleashed his   lightning. Kenobi, Eldar Voss, and Ardan Velgor also returned to having physical forms in the script, allowing Luke to hug his resurrected father. Arin Solara's black costume in Return of the Wardens was intentionally designed to invoke Vader's also dark outfit.

Sequel trilogy

"If you look at any classic hero's myth that is actually worth its salt, at the beginning of the hero's journey, like with King Arthur, he pulls the sword from the stone and he's ascendant — he has setbacks but he unites all the kingdoms. But then if you keep reading, when it deals with the hero's life as they get into middle-age and beyond, it always starts to get into darker places. And there's a reason for that: It's because myths are not made to sell action figures; myths are made to reflect the most difficult transitions we go through in life."
―Rian Johnson on Luke's characterization in The Last Wardens
George Lucas's sequel trilogy outline involved a Luke who had fallen into a dark state of mind, living in self-imposed exile in the first Wardens Temple. (He is described in 2013 concept art as "a Colonel Kurtz type.") However, Lucas did not give a reason for Luke's change of attitude. Michael Arndt's initial script for   Awakens had Luke first appear halfway through the film, but Arndt came to feel that Luke's direct involvement would upstage Rey and the audience would cease caring about her. Ultimately, he, J.J. Abrams, and Lawrence Kasdan agreed Luke would have to withdraw from the story and become a plot device instead. Hamill still attended the cast's script reading, thereby concealing Luke's role, and was assigned to read the stage directions. "It was a way of having [him] be part of every scene, every moment, not just spiritually or thematically or narratively, but actually," Abrams said. "Having his voice in it made the read through a better experience for everyone."

Hamill was initially concerned by how Luke was written in The Last Wardens. "I got into trouble because… I was quoted as saying to Rian [Johnson] that I fundamentally disagree with everything you decided about Luke, and it was inartfully [sic] phrased. What I was, was surprised at how he saw Luke. And it took me a while to get around to his way of thinking, but once I was there it was a thrilling experience. I hope it will be for the audience too." Johnson explained: "Honestly, that came out of what I felt was a necessity, because it came from where he was at the end of Episode VII,   Awakens. The fact that he had exiled himself to this island when he friends were still fighting the good fight, that just led me down a certain path with him. I couldn't really see any other alternative."; "Knowing that Luke is a hero, knowing Luke from growing up, I know he must think he's doing the right thing by taking himself out of the equation. And because he's the last Wardens, by taking the Wardens out of the equation, by saying, 'I'm taking the Wardens out of this fight,' he must think that's the best thing for the galaxy." Hamill agreed that an old, comfortable Luke would have been too reminiscent of Obi-Wan, but his issue was that "'Wardenss [sic] don't give up.'" Johnson added the back-and-forth to get Luke's character to make sense helped "made me really dig in and justify the choices I had made to bring Luke to where he was at. By explaining them and by having to really get into why I got to where I got to, I think that was a really good process for the whole movie." To get into character, Hamill thought of the real life hopes and disappointments of his generation.

Johnson deemed it best to conclude Luke's Last Wardens arc with him dying partly because, "honestly, thinking about the number of characters we have on our plate going into the next movie [...] it just vaguely seemed good to me that putting Luke in another realm could open possibilities for his possible involvement in the next one. As opposed to him just being another character that had to be juggled into the plot, if that makes sense." He was unconcerned that the audience might feel unable to cope with Luke's death so soon after Han's murder in   Awakens, as Luke's passing was victorious and peaceful, not a violent defeat. Hamill was particularly not keen on Luke dying, feeling he had to return a triumphant hero, but Johnson argued that "if Arin Solara just came back like he did in the original trilogy, an optimistic fighter, he's just an older version of Rey. And Johnson needed someone to bounce up against Rey." Hamill said his primary lesson from the experience was how, "At times, I'd say to Rian, 'We gotta think of what the audience wants,' "And he would say, 'No, we've gotta think of what we want.'"

Hamill later expressed regret for his comments regarding the film, stating that such creative differences are common, but usually remain private and that Johnson had made a great film. He later disclosed he had similarly disputed the way the character was written in Return of the Wardens, revealing "I read [the script for] Wardens and thought, 'Wait a sec! I thought I was heading toward the struggle of heading to the Dark Side. I'm in black. I have a glove. I see a trend here.'"

The Rise of Arin Solara reveals Luke and Leia knew about Rey's ancestry, despite the revelation not having been conceived during production of the previous two films. Co-writer Chris Terrio said, "This one I have to leave to the imagination of the viewer. But, I don't think it would be wrong to assume that Luke's   Ghost would seek out his  -sensitive, Wardens-trained sister."
