Naboo

"An extraordinary world, Naboo. I'll never understand how it spawned someone as stubborn as our Supreme Chancellor."
―Bail Prestor Organa
Naboo (pronounced /nə'bu/) was a planet that was the sector capital of the Chommell sector in the Mid Rim and Trailing Sectors, near the border with the Outer Rim Territories. The planet had an unusual plasma core, and its surface was a largely unspoiled world with large plains, swamps and seas.

The Gungans were an amphibian species native to Naboo. The planet was also home to Human colonists from Grizmallt who called themselves the Naboo. In late galactic history, Naboo was mostly known as the homeworld of notable historical figures who played major roles in the downfall of the Galactic Republic and the rise of the Galactic Empire, namely Padmé Amidala, Emperor Palpatine and Jar Jar Binks.

"Dis'n loverly."
―Jar Jar Binks, on Naboo
Naboo was a geologically unique world in the galaxy. A plasmic molten outer core surrounded an inner core, believed to be composed primarily of a nickel-iron alloy, with very small amounts of some other elements. These elements were abundant in other chemical compositions in the galaxy, but it was the unique properties of the plasma which interested astrophysicists, plasma that the two primary civilizations harnessed to supply clean and efficient energy highly valued throughout the galaxy.

The plasmic magma "seethes and bubbles" from the center of the planet carving labyrinths of winding tunnels and caverns similar to lava tubes of traditional magma flows. Much of these abyssal labyrinths were submerged in great underground oceans so deep that they went right through the planet, which were home to immense aquatic animals and creatures that were never seen on the surface. Animals such as the colo claw fish, opee sea killer, sando aqua monster and others inhabited this underworld realm. Gungans dominated these "underwaterways," using them as a highway of sorts between their surface Holy Places and their underwater cities. The Gungans also used these tunnels for trading between Bubble cities.

Plasmic eruptions found their way to the porous crust of the planet, affecting geographic features there such as mountain chains and plate tectonics.

The surface of Naboo was covered by dense swamps, rolling grass plains, seas and verdant hills. The largest mountain chain, the Gallo Mountains, bisected the largest continent and divided the great grass plains of the north from the Lianorm Swamp and bayous in the south. South of the Lianorm Swamp was the great, sea-like Lake Paonga, where at the bottom lay the Gungan city of Otoh Gunga. The Lake Country was an area known for its natural beauty, and was home to many vacation estates.

History

Pre-Human period

The Gungans were believed to be indigenous to Naboo, but this is uncertain. They have been there a long time, as they engaged in battles of survival with the veermoks during an ice age.

An alien civilization of reptilian humanoids remembered as the Elders colonized Naboo. They warred with the Gungans, forcing the Gungans to retreat underwater, giving rise to modern Gungan civilization. Monuments and ruins, scattered throughout the planet, were built by the Elders. The largest of these ruins, located on the northern edge of the Lianorm Swamp, was identified as the Gungan Holy Place. The Gungans viewed these ruins as sacred, and their builders as "guds." Both Gungan and Human Naboo scientists agreed that the end of the Elder civilization may have been the result of the Elders' negligence towards their environment.

The Ankura and Otolla branches of Gungans united, forming a symbiotic relationship. They dominated Naboo for millennia afterwards, though largely keeping to the swamps and waterways, the mountains and grasslands considered "desert-like" for them.

Human colonization

Around 3951 BBY, prior to the end of the Sith Civil War, Elsinoré den Tasia ascended to the throne of the Core World of Grizmallt. She sponsored the Republic explorer Kwilaan, who discovered the planet which then became known as Naboo, after the deity Nabu. Naboo quickly became notorious amongst big-game hunters who favored the indigenous veermoks, although it would be five decades before permanent Human settlement.

Eventually, in approximately 3900 BBY, Human refugees fleeing a violent revolution on Grizmallt, led by none other than Kwilaan with a fleet of three ships—Beneficent Tasia, Constant and Mother Vima, settled in the mountains and great grass plains. Cultural differences led to tension between the two peoples—but direct conflict was rare. Over time, there was more conflict between the various Human settlements than between the Human nation of Naboo and Gungans.

War of the Gungan Tribes

The Gungans long lived in rival cities. In 3000 BBY, a warlord known as Rogoe destroyed Otoh Sancture using Bursas. Boss Gallo escaped this destruction, being on a hunt at the time to provide food for a feast. Gallo united the thieves under rogue Captain Marsune and the various Gungan cities' defense forces to form the Gungan Grand Army. Gallo and Marsune led the Army to conquer Rogoe's capital, Spearhead, which he renamed Otoh Gunga—a city for all the Gungans. The Bosses of Otoh Gunga, including Gallo's descendant Rugor Nass, maintained a hierarchical leadership over the Bosses of the other cities thenceforth.

Early Gungan/Human cooperation

Despite the prejudices that existed between the Human Naboo and the Gungans, cooperation was not unknown. Although both civilizations turned a blind eye to it, they came to depend on each other in trade conducted on the fringes, out of sight of "respectable" society. In a progressive move, when the Human city Kaadara was founded in 2900 BBY, Regent Kallos Sook hired a Gungan security force to protect the city from beasts. While this tradition eventually died out, it was revived in Kaadara after the Battle of Naboo in 32 BBY.

Colonization of Rori

King Narmlé the Explorer colonized Naboo's swampy moon of Rori circa 2000 BBY. A city there still bears his name. Some scientists contended that earlier colonists settled Rori before the Narmle colony, but if this was true, no trace of them was ever found.

The Jafan dynasty of Theed

In 1000 BBY, a crisis led to a large scale conflict engulfing all the Human Naboo princely city-states, though there was no evidence of Gungan participation. The conflict was dragged out for more than a century, eventually becoming known as the Time of Suffering.

Around 868 BBY, Naboo joined the Galactic Republic.

By 830 BBY, Jafan ended the Time of Suffering, uniting all Naboo under his leadership becoming King of all Naboo, and founding Theed as his capital in 832 BBY. Jafan ushered in the "Great Time of Peace" and established Theed (previously a farming community along the banks of the river Solleu) as his Royal Capital, eclipsing Dee'ja Peak. Jafan established the Jafan royal family, which would provide hereditary rulers of Naboo for generations, until the last of their line expired without legitimate issue.

Around five hundred years before the Battle of Naboo, recruiters sent by Hugo Bartyn approached a number of needy Gungan locals. Bartyn wanted amphibian fishermen to settle a new city in Lamaredd and tempted these poverty-stricken individuals with promises of untouched seas in a new frontier. Once they arrived, however, they became slave laborers.

The Gungan-Naboo War

The Naboo and Gungans fought an open war between 150 BBY and 121 BBY, and during the conflict, the ruler of Naboo was killed. Once hereditary within the Jafan royal family, the Naboo elected a new monarch to lead them in the war. In an effort to turn the tide of the war in the Naboo's favor, a coalition of noble houses struck a secret deal with an offworld mercenary group, though the war was soon resolved without the need for external intervention.

With the conclusion of the war, the position of monarch became an elected post. However, provisions in the constitution allowed for the monarchy to become again hereditary once a dynasty worthy enough was revealed, a clause the Naboo attempted to invoke a hundred years later for Amidala, who declined the offer, and later with Kylantha, who may have accepted the offer.

The first invasion of Naboo

In 100 BBY, the Gungan Grand Army fought off an unknown mercenary force that had invaded Naboo. The Gungans were victorious only after many deaths and the destruction of several of their swamp cities. As a result of the war, the Gungan tribes were united even closer than they were after the War of Gungan Tribes thousands of years before.

Very little was ever made public regarding the cause of the war or the source of the mercenaries, but the most influential of the Naboo's nobles knew that the mercenary group had been hired by several noble families in an effort to claim plasma sources. The Houses that contributed most to funding the mercenary army were House Tapalo and House Veruna. Disgusted by this, the patriarch of House Palpatine challenged the leader of House Tapalo to a duel of honor at the Palpatines' ancestral home of Convergence. Palpatine died at Tapalo's blade.

Palpatine's rise to power

The future Dark Lord of the Sith and Galactic Emperor Palpatine was born on Naboo in 82 BBY. Born to Cosinga Palpatine in the noble House Palpatine, the young man joined public service in the Legislative Youth Program, as was mandatory for all the Naboo between the ages of twelve and twenty. Deeply ambitious, Palpatine came to despise his domineering father, who he saw as insular, incompetent, and arrogant, going as far to abandon his given name out of spite.

In 65 BBY, the election for the new Monarch of Naboo was under way, and two different political camps opposed each other: one camp, led by Bon Tapalo, wanted to open Naboo to the greater galaxy and stimulate the economy by opening the planet's plasma resources to galactic corporations such as the Trade Federation and Damask Holdings; the other wanted to maintain Naboo's isolationist policy, which would prevent these companies from exploiting their world. Senator Vidar Kim and Cosinga Palpatine supported Tapalo's opponent, believing in keeping Naboo isolated. The discovery of a vast plasma source beneath Theed gave weight to Tapalo's campaign, and Tapalo approached Subtext Mining and Damask Holdings to conduct preliminary surveys of the new resource.

Palpatine, in a bid to spite his father and in accordance with his own political views, supported Tapalo's campaign in secret, acting as a spy in the rival campaign. He leaked information surrounding the Gungan–Naboo War, which discredited Tapalo's opponents when it revealed that they were the very same noble houses that had initiated the Naboo's first attempt to enlist mercenaries. This attracted the attention of Magister Hego Damask, head of Damask Holdings, who negotiated with the Trade Federation, Outer Rim Construction and Assembly, and the InterGalactic Banking Clan to create plans for a Plasma Refinery Complex in Theed for the Tapalo campaign. Shortly afterwards, Damask made contact with the young Palpatine. Unknown to Palpatine, Damask was actually the Sith Lord Darth Plagueis and had seen in Palpatine the potential to be his apprentice. This was accomplished when Palpatine murdered his own family and accepted Plagueis as his Master.

Palpatine, now the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, used his public service on Naboo to remain in politics, which allowed him to rise up to become the Senator for Naboo and later Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic. Meanwhile, with Plagueis' support, Bon Tapalo became King of Naboo and negotiated a deal to sell the planet's plasma through the Trade Federation. Isolationists like Vidar Kim, however, pointed out that the Trade Federation would sell Naboo's plasma on for ten or even twenty times what it paid for it, and saw the deal as unjust and exploitative.

Amidala's rise to power

By the start of King Ars Veruna's reign in 46 BBY, Naboo had become a major player in the interstellar plasma trade market. The energy source powered everything from simple lights to great Gungan underwater cities and capital starships. As well as the Plasma Refinery Complex in Theed, King Veruna was also able to build a new commercial starport in Keren around 38 BBY. By 33 BBY, however, the Naboo had become aware of their inequitable agreement with the Trade Federation and protested and wished to be free of the contract.

King Veruna had quietly established his own arrangements with the Trade Federation, but he was aware of his people's dissatisfaction with the agreement. Veruna established a new Space Fighter Corps as part of the Royal Naboo Security Forces, based around the new and advanced N-1 starfighter. Theed Hangar was built next to the refining station to house the new military forces. Veruna believed that this would allow Naboo to renegotiate its contract with the Trade Federation from a position of strength, though the move was unpopular on Naboo, as these precautions were perceived as provocative posturing.

Allying with various criminal organizations, Veruna planned to sell Naboo's plasma at a more favorable rate through Black Sun while the Bando Gora mercenary group protected Naboo's interests offworld. Seeing Senator Palpatine as being in the pocket of the Trade Federation, Veruna planned to recall and replace him after he won re-election. Palpatine, meanwhile, began supporting the young Padmé Naberrie to replace Veruna, who rallied against Veruna's corruption. Seeing him as responsible for the initial, unfair contract, Veruna attempted to assassinate Hego Damask at his retreat on Sojourn. However, Damask survived, and Veruna abdicated and fled into exile in fear of his life. He was subsequently found and murdered by Damask, who revealed to him his true identity as a Sith Lord before killing him.

Padmé Naberrie, who took the regnal name Amidala, ascended to the throne in 33 BBY at 14 years old, with the promise to deal with the Trade Federation without violence. To that end, she instructed Senator Palpatine to support the Senate proposal to enforce taxation on the Free Trade Zones, with the aim of curbing the Trade Federation's power and abuses. Unknown to her, Palpatine, as Darth Sidious, planned to use this to outrage the Trade Federation and goad them into blockading Naboo in protest, creating a confrontation that would destabilize the Republic.

The Blockade of Naboo

Once in power, Queen Amidala opened negotiations with the Trade Federation. However, the Federation was scandalized by Naboo's resistance to its authority, which coincided with the Galactic Senate voting to enact legislation of the trade routes to outlying systems. Both actions were perceived by Federation leadership as a threat to their commercial interests and power. The Federation answered with a military blockade of Naboo, with the aim of forcing Naboo into subservience and to hopefully intimidate the Senate into repealing the taxation measure. The Federation leadership was secretly advised, and manipulated, by the Sith.

Jedi Involvement

Queen Amidala sent for Galactic Republic mediation to end the conflict and the Republic sent two Jedi Knights as ambassadors. Their mediation was unsuccessful, however, and the Federation prematurely launched their invasion of Naboo. Naboo fell quickly. Though they had a powerful Space Fighter Corps (King Veruna's true legacy), Queen Amidala held off action until all negotiations failed, refusing "any course of action which would lead to war," despite alternate advice from Governor Sio Bibble.

The Naboo government and citizens were captured and imprisoned in detention camps outside the cities. Eventually rescued by the Jedi Knights, Queen Amidala left Naboo to personally plead for aid in the Galactic Senate. Governor Sio Bibble and others were to organize a resistance movement in the meantime.

Reaching for help

Once on Coruscant, Queen Amidala addressed the Senate. The Federation had powerful and rich allies, and Senator Palpatine convinced the Queen to demand a Vote of No Confidence in the Senate leadership against Chancellor Finis Valorum. By doing this, she hoped to force a change for a more favorable Chancellorship. The Queen returned to her homeworld to lead the resistance herself. Once home Padmé Amidala sought the aid of the reclusive Gungans, pleading for joint action against a common enemy. The Gungans agreed to an alliance and led an army against the Federation's mechanical forces, primarily as a distraction to lower the Federation's defenses in the capital of Naboo.

Captain Panaka and the RNSF were able to organize the Space Fighter Corps to their fighters, and launch a last effort against the Federation capital ships. Ultimately the Naboo-Gungan Alliance was able to defeat the Federation, when young Anakin Skywalker accidentally flew one of the otherwise unused fighters into the heart of the Federation's Droid Control Ship and destroyed the ship's main power reactors. For her heroic effort the Naboo wished to alter the constitution allowing for Padmé Amidala, and possibly her heirs, to reign for life. However, Padmé Amidala declined the honor, relieved to step down from power.

Aftermath of the invasion

The Federation invasion and occupation drastically changed Naboo, with the Naboo questioning their role within the Galactic Republic. Many Naboo now believed that the Republic was powerless and unable to protect them, as demonstrated by the events of the Federation occupation.

These Naboo believed that it was now their own responsibility to provide for their own security, and reasoned that revenue from the plasma trade would allow them to pay for it. Free from the one-sided contracts of the Trade Federation, the Naboo fully received the profits from the plasma trade. Other Naboo continued to support the Galactic Republic, consoled that the new Supreme Chancellor, Palpatine, was a native of Naboo himself.

Both factions of the Naboo political establishment favored a stronger Naboo and increased military expenditures. The budget of the Royal Naboo Security Forces was greatly expanded and given a heavier arsenal of weaponry and armored vehicles, such as the N-1T Advanced Starfighter and the Heavy Champion.

Eight years after the Battle of Naboo, the Separatist Crisis began with the attack of the recently established Confederacy of Independent Systems.

New relations with the Gungans

Amidala, along with Obi-Wan, R2-D2, and Jar Jar Binks, did participate in the Gungan colonization of Ohma-D'un, a result of badly overcrowded Gungan cities.

When her second four-year term as Queen ended, Padmé Amidala abdicated in favor of Queen Jamillia, who asked her to continue serving Naboo as Senator. Padmé "couldn't refuse the Queen" and returned to politics after a brief respite. Jar Jar Binks was also appointed as a specific representative for his species, becoming the first Gungan to be represented off Naboo.

Clone Wars

Political influence

The Galactic Senate was a new forum for Padmé Amidala. Though some on Naboo and in the Galactic Senate wanted a centralized executive, Padmé Amidala voted again and again against the Military Creation Act, becoming a leader of the opposition. The Act would allow the Senate to raise a standing military to serve at the discretion of the Chancellor of the Senate, while also greatly restricting member planets' military forces, such as the Royal Naboo Security Forces, to mere policing authorities. Padmé Amidala may have opposed the act because of the restrictions on home planets.

Senator Padmé Amidala, however, was outmaneuvered, and the Senate voted to create a standing military due to the rising threat of the Separatists, using the ability to give the Supreme Chancellor emergency powers to approve the creation of the Grand Army of the Republic, which was already formed. In the meantime, Palpatine, himself a native of Naboo, successfully became the Chancellor of the Republic, and his hard-line stances were generally supported by Naboo, still rebuilding after occupation.

Separatist attacks

During the Clone Wars, which began in 22 BBY, the Confederacy of Independent Systems (including the Trade Federation) launched an unsuccessful campaign for Naboo, buoyed by growing support from Naboo Separatist sympathizers such as Queen Jamillia. Durge and Asajj Ventress teamed-up to unleash a biological weapon on the planet, but only succeeded in wiping out the Gungan colony on Ohma-D'un before they were stopped. The event eroded the support once enjoyed by the CIS from Naboo Separatist sympathizers, leading the CIS to adopt a more aggressive strategy of invasion and conquest of Naboo.

In the first year of the war, the CIS refitted a hidden, underground laboratory, built by the Trade Federation during their invasion of Naboo, in the eastern swamps for Doctor Nuvo Vindi to develop a biological weapon, known as the Blue Shadow Virus, to be dispersed throughout the galaxy in special detonation devices. The laboratory was discovered by Senator Padmé Amidala and Representative Jar Jar Binks who reported its location back to Theed before being captured by the Separatists. Republic forces, led by Generals Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Commander Ahsoka Tano, raided the lab to neutralize the viral threat. In the ensuing skirmish, one of the bombs detonated, releasing the deadly plague throughout the facility and causing the base to go into lockdown. Kenobi and Skywalker, who were outside the base when it was hermetically sealed, were able to discover a antidote for the virus and free their comrades from the lab. This not only eliminated a threat to Naboo, but to the entire galaxy as well.

At one point during the war, Naboo experienced peaceful days, where Amidala spent time enjoying her gardens near Theed. One day, she visited a bazaar on the city's outskirts and encountered a reclusive artist. The artist was transfixed by the senator's gaze and experienced visions of her and her unborn twins. After returning to his castle studio, the artist painted images of Amidala for twenty-four weeks straight, after which he had a revelation that Amidala's life was in danger. Simultaneously, Theed was attacked by the Separatist Droid Army. While Amidala tried to escape, the artist entered the city and searched for her, ultimately saving her life by taking blaster fire meant for her.

At the end of the Clone Wars, which saw the defeat of the Separatists, the fall of the Jedi Order and the transformation of the Republic into the Empire, Senator Amidala died shortly after the birth of her twins, Luke and Leia. It is suggested that her death was due to a broken heart, after learning her husband, Anakin Skywalker, turned to the dark side and became the dreaded Sith Lord Darth Vader. While the remaining Jedi hid the children, sending Leia to live with Senator Bail Organa and his wife Breha on Alderaan and Luke to live with his father's stepbrother Owen Lars and Lars' wife Beru on Tatooine, the senator's formal funeral was held in the capital of Theed, presided over by Ryoo Thule, Naberrie's maternal grandmother.

Imperial era

"Naboo. Isn't that where top Imperial officers go on vacation?"
―A spacer, to Trehla Keelo
In the following years, Naboo generally supported the positions of Emperor Palpatine, including the establishment of the Galactic Empire, although doing so in a way that attempted to remind the population of the peace it had enjoyed during the days of the Republic. Many Naboo served in the Imperial Services, and Captain Panaka became an aide to the Emperor, later ascending to the rank of Moff of the Chommell Sector.

Assassination of Queen Apailana

During the early years of the Imperial era, Queen Apailana remained loyal to the Empire on the surface but secretly harbored doubts about the new regime. Throughout her reign, government buildings and organizations on Naboo continued to refer to the Republic, not the newly formed Empire. She secretly hid a group of Jedi who had survived Order 66, which would be her undoing, for she was caught in 18 BBY. During the isolated conflict that would later be known as the Fall of Naboo, Apailana and the Jedi survivors she harbored were killed by the 501st Legion.

She was replaced by Queen Kylantha, whom the Empire thought it could control as a puppet ruler. The planet also gained entire legions of troops, which found themselves in guerrilla-styled skirmishes with the local Gungan populations. The oppression of the Gungans led them to conduct raids and covert missions from the relative safety of the swamps and forests.

Kylantha's Rule

Kylantha did not favor a return to the Old Republic, nor was she an Imperial proponent. Shortly after ascending the throne she ordered a discreet investigation into the death of her predecessor, learning that the Empire had a hand in her death. Maintaining the status quo, Kylantha was careful not to antagonize Imperial relations, but she refused to alter the democratic structure of the Naboo constitution or relinquish Naboo sovereignty and Law. Like Queen Jamillia, Kylantha may have held Separatist sympathies.

Kylantha was very popular with the people of Naboo, a popularity that insulated her from overt Imperial pressures. However, the Queen was often sequestered in Theed Palace by Imperial Admiral Nial Declann. Kylantha reigned for much longer than prior rulers. She appointed Padmé Amidala's niece, Pooja Naberrie, to the Imperial Senate. There, Pooja was a contemporary of her cousin (though neither knew of their family ties until 36 ABY), Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan.

During this time, Rori was the site of a large battle between the forces of the Alliance to Restore the Republic and the Galactic Empire. The battle that engulfed the city of Restuss would be the first and last known sighting of Emperor's Hand Aralina Silk.

The New Republic

After the downfall of the Empire, Naboo ambassadors were sent to meet with the members of the Alliance of Free Planets, and were among the signers of the Common Charter. During the time of the New Republic, the Chommell Sector was represented in the New Republic Senate by another Queen was elected to the monarchy.

The planet was a New Republic stronghold during the Thrawn campaign.

Galactic Alliance

After the Sith–Imperial War, the citizens of the world were supportive of Roan Fel's Empire-in-exile, but as Naboo was controlled by the new Sith Empire under Darth Krayt, they kept their true allegiance secret. The world was host for one of the largest Imperial Missions in the galaxy.

By 137 ABY, a restaurant located on the top floors of Padmé Amidala's old apartment on Coruscant was named the Naboo Queen.

Culture

Historically, the Naboo were a pastoral and nomadic people, migrating in tribes and clans on the vast "oceanic" grass-plains, with few settlements of substance. Tribes traced their descent from the colony vessels that brought them to Naboo, and clans traced descent from the founding settlers. The Naboo continued to place great value on genealogical decent, though by the era of Queen Amidala, few families could trace their history to the original colonists with any certainty.

The Naboo developed into a classic feudal society with a hereditary noble class and common folk, though unlike most feudal societies, there was no record of a subservient serf class.

Naboo princely city-states traded with each other and with the Gungans. Generally the city-states acknowledged a ceremonial "High King"—a position that at times rotated between the tribal or city-state princes, though at other times was vested in an hereditary royal house. This ceremonial position was largely powerless and a form of peerage democracy evolved, though by the time of King Jafan, the position became more substantial.

The Naboo eventually became known for being peaceful, enlightened, and artistic, among other things.

Adulthood and the right to vote was based on intellectual maturity rather than biological age, hence a reason for so many teenagers being involved in public service. The Naboo were known to elect young women to high public offices, such as in the cases of Queen and Senator Padmé Amidala, Queen Jamillia, Queen Neeyutnee, Queen Apailana, Senator Pooja Naberrie.

Settlements and regions

Despite nomadic elements in early Naboo society, eventually more substantial settlements emerged along trade routes and river crossings, or at defensible citadels, such as Dee'ja Peak in the Gallo Mountains. As one of the first human settlements on the planet, Dee'ja Peak retained a degree of prestige and reverence long after political power shifted to Theed. Keren and Theed both developed as farming communities whose surplus of foodstuffs provided for a large leisure class. Keren eventually became the commercial hub while Theed became more aristocratic. Kaadara developed as a coastal town for the few Naboo fishermen. Moenia was the first, and only, human colony built in the traditional Gungan homelands of the Lianorm Swamps.

The geographic features of the planet defined the regions of the grass plains in the north, the mountains in the center, and the swamps and bayous in the south.

The northern grass plains bordered the northern ocean, and were divided into regional provinces of the Great Grass Plains with Theed the major city, the Eastern Great Grass Plains with few settlements, and the Western Great Grass Plains with the seaside community of Kaadara and the commercial center of Keren. The Gallo Mountains regional province contained Dee'ja Peak and the Varykino, known as the Lake Retreat in the Lake Country, while the vast Lianorm Swamp dominated the south with the city of Moenia the regional capital. Emperor Palpatine maintained an Imperial Retreat on a dormant plasmic volcanic caldera in this region.

Religion

See also Naboo religion, Brotherhood of Cognizance.

The polytheistic Naboo worshiped many allegorical deities, such as the Goddess of Safety. The deity of Shiraya reflected many aspects common to lunar worship found in many human cultures. Naboo Ancient philosophers were revered and honored as enlightened gurus, and with the reverence of family ancestors, formed an important aspect in Naboo religious traditions. Paired statues of semi-legendary or archetypical gurus were prominently displayed in ranks on either side of the steps leading to the Theed Royal Palace.

Many devoted holy men and women formed monastic communities and orders, such as the Brotherhood of Cognizance, which focused on a particular deity or an enlightened guru. These religious orders were governed by a pontifex, and had a monastic hierarchy typical of many human religious orders. Often the more ascetic orders were found in remote and isolated locations, preferring a life spent in solitude, without worldly distraction and centered on peaceful contemplation.

Military

Being a relatively peaceful planet, Naboo only maintained light security forces during the decades leading up to the Clone Wars. The defense of the world mainly consisted of N-1 starfighters, which had the support of tankers during longer journeys, short-range Gungan G-1 starfighters following the unification of the two species and militarized speeders for land warfare. The Gungans aided the Naboo in installing a planetwide shield network designed to protect against invasions after 32 BBY.

Politics

Domestic affairs

"Naboo, you see, is not hierarchical like your system. Yes, we have a queen, but we elect her, as well as her advisors."
―Ryoo Thule to Inquisitor Malorum
Nabooan politics were notable for applying a system of an elected monarchy, where the eligibility of the Monarch of Naboo was not related to age or power; rulers were traditionally selected for their intelligence. Likewise, citizens were not subject to age restrictions to have the right to vote, but were required to take aptitude tests in school that proved a certain level of intellectual maturity. The monarch's advisors were also elected by popular vote. However, the Naboo favored purity of heart over any other qualification, which sometimes made them elevate soft-minded individuals to positions beyond their abilities.

Every elected official on Naboo was chosen on meritocratic grounds, and governed for a limited amount of time. For the monarch, up to two four-year terms were allowed, as determined by the planet's constitution. Often when a Naboo entered into political life he or she adopted a "Name of State." This name of state was used for public occasions and represented the honor and dignity of the office one chose. Padmé Naberrie, for instance, adopted the name of Amidala, while other sovereigns like Ars Veruna or Bon Tapalo used their second names.

Gungan Ambassadors also represented their interests in the Human capital of Theed, within the context of reconciliation that marked the period after the Trade Federation invasion of the planet.

Although mostly peaceful, Theed was nevertheless the site of protests organized by migrant laborers around 22 BBY, who cried out against their poor working conditions, only to be forcibly removed by Theed police forces. The politicians, however, were mostly sheltered from that kind of social turmoil, in order to maintain the utopian image that Naboo was so fond of.

Foreign affairs

"Everything was great until the scandal hit about Veruna's Foreign Affairs. Suddenly things got tense around the house. Dad blamed Amidala. You couldn't even mention her name without him exploding into a rage."
―Ian Lago recalling the scandal
Through the Naboo Diplomatic Corps, the planet cherished diplomatic relations with other worlds. A much advertised travel destination, Naboo was known as "The Jewel World of the Outer Rim Territories," despite being located in the Mid Rim. During the Trade Federation blockade, Ambassador Kron was Alderaan's representative on Naboo. The Nabooans also maintained an embassy on the galactic capital Coruscant,

By the end of Ars Veruna's reign, a corruption scandal tied to the king's management of Foreign Affairs broke out. Not long afterwards, the monarch abdicated the throne.This name of state was used for public occasions and represented the honor and dignity of the office one chose. Padmé Naberrie adopted the name of Amidala, while other sovereigns like Ars Veruna or Bon Tapalo used their second names. Palpatine was sometimes thought to have been a Name of State, but it really was the Galactic Emperor's surname.

Exports

Naboo's main export was the plasma that flowed from below the surface of the planet. The plasma trade on Naboo began during the reign of King Veruna, and was cornered by the Trade Federation, eventually leading to the Blockade of Naboo. Blossom wine was also one of Naboo's exports, along with fine art and architectural influence.

The footwear industry in Naboo was known to be specifically scarce, mostly because locals, particularly Gungans, were prone to go shoeless. Gungans wanting to work in footwear, such as Brute, were forced to relocate.

Known political figures of Naboo

