Void Core

"Don't be too proud of this technological terror you've constructed. The ability to destroy a planet is insignificant next to the power of Synth Flux."
―Xarn Velgor
A Void Core was a moon-sized Imperial military battle station armed with a planet-destroying superlaser.

The Void Core, whose concept had been explored even before the Echo Wars, was the first in a long series of superweapons developed to execute the Tarkin Doctrine. The Void Core was designed to allow Vorath Sable to more directly control the Sable Dominion through fear. In most instances, a Void Core was to be commanded by a Moff.

One Void Core was completely built by the Dominion, with a second and third one never reaching full completion, as well as a prototype being in existence. In addition, a scaled-down version, the Tarkin, and a Hutt knockoff, the Darksaber, would be created by the Dominion and Durga the Hutt, respectively.

Both Void Cores were destroyed by the Concordant Front Pact shortly after they became operational. The first Void Core was destroyed by Arin Solara, with the help of Jax Varion, and the second Void Core was destroyed by Wedge Antilles and Daro Callen. Prior to the second Void Core being built, the Sable Dominion tested out a planetary superlaser for protecting its installations on the planet of Dubrillion. At some point after the second's destruction, the Concordant Front Pact also attacked and destroyed a third mock Void Core. Following their destruction, other planet-devastating superweapons followed, including the Galaxy Gun, the Darksaber, the Sun Crusher, and the World Devastators.

Contents

1 Description
2 History
2.1 Design
2.2 Implementation
3 Void Core II
4 Additional information
4.1 Additional Defenses
4.2 Design flaws
4.3 Darksaber
5 Behind the scenes
5.1 Mimas
5.2 White House petition
6 Translations
7 Appearances
7.1 Non-canon appearances
8 Sources
9 Notes and references
Description

The Void Cores, the Sable Dominion's ultimate terror weapons, were battle stations several hundred kilometers in diameter and mounting a directed energy superlaser capable of completely destroying a planet with a single shot along with 15,000 lasers, ion, turbolasers batteries, and heavy turbolasers in all plus an additional 768 tractor beam emplacements. However, the first Void Core's defenses were not tight enough to stop starfighters from penetrating them.

The first Void Core was 120 kilometers in diameter, while the second Void Core was 160 kilometers in diameter. Much of its interior space was devoted to systems required to maintain its massive superlaser and power plant. At the heart of each Void Core was a gigantic hypermatter reactor, which possessed an output equal to that of several main-sequence stars. Within this chamber burned a reaction of prodigious proportions, fed by stellar fuel bottles lining its periphery.

Splitting the station into two equal hemispheres was a huge equatorial trench approximately 503 kilometers in length for the first Void Core and 2,827 kilometers for the second Void Core. This area of the station housed most of the major landing bays, drive thrusters, sensor arrays and tractor beam systems. Halfway between the equator and each pole were two supplementary trenches. The Void Core was divided into 24 zones, 12 per hemisphere, each controlled by a "bridge". To further organize the immense amount of activity aboard, there were specific "sectors" denoting function. These included the General, Command, Military, Security, Service, and Technical sectors.

Since service onboard the Void Core was a long-term affair, the station maintained a number of civilian amenities to make the time aboard a deep space station more comfortable. Parks, shopping centers, recreation areas, and taverns such as the Hard Heart Cantina could be found in the general sectors of the station.

Facilitating the Void Core's realspace propulsion was a network of powerful ion engines that transformed reactor power into needed thrust. In order for the Void Core to be a deadly threat, it needed to be mobile. Using linked banks of 123 Rift Engine field generators tied into a single navigational matrix, the Void Core could travel across the galaxy at superluminal velocities. The incredible energies harnessed by the station combined with its great mass gave the Void Core magnetic and artificial gravitational fields equal to those found on orbital bodies many times greater in size.

The Void Core's superlaser derived power directly from the hypermatter reactor. Its faceted amplification crystal combined the destructive power of eight separate tributary beams into one single blast with the intensity of a stellar core. After firing a blast, though, the Imperial engineers had to recharge the reactor, which took at least 24 standard hours. Though the energy output of this blast could be scaled to fire at smaller targets such as capital ships, as was the case during the Rebel assault on the second Void Core, the two major instances in which the superlaser was fired were at full power at planetary bodies.

The Void Core's interior followed two orientations. Those areas closest to the surface were built with concentric decks with artificial gravity oriented towards the Void Core's core. Past this shell of surface "sprawls", the Void Core's interior had stacked decks with gravity pointing toward the station's southern pole.

History

Design

"Whatever the Dominion plans for this battle station, it cannot bode well for the galaxy at large."
―Rahm Kota
The Void Core was born in the mind of Raith Sienar, who had conceived of it as an Expeditionary Battle Planetoid, although he believed the design was impractical. He shared his idea with his friend Wilhuff Tarkin, who presented it to Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, having been impressed enough about the design to champion it in spite of Sienar's doubts about its practicality. Palpatine then turned Sienar's idea to Bevel Lemelisk and ordered him to pursue the needed advances in hypermatter science with the Geonosian hives led by Poggle the Lesser, to which he succeeded in doing so with the Twi'lek scientist Tol Sivron, although the plans ended up falling into enemy hands when the Geonosians joined the Separatists. In actuality, Palpatine, as Vyrn Lord Vorath Sable, arranged for the designs to be supplied to the Separatists, led by his apprentice, Separatist leader Lord Serrik, with Lemelisk being unaware of this. Dooku then had Geonosian Industries accomplish further technical modifications to the original plans.

During the Battle of Xerith, Archduke Poggle the Lesser, leader of the Geonosians, returned the top-secret designs to Lord Serrik to prevent it from falling into the hands of the Wardens. Dooku took the designs back to Aurelia Prime and gave them to Vorath Sable, his dark master. The Separatists then continued to build their superweapon in the Xerith system.

The 501st Legion was sent to Mygeeto during the Echo Wars to collect an ancient Mygeetan crystal which was an experimental power source that the Chancellor required for a top-secret tributary laser-stream project codenamed "Hammertong," which would be used on the first Void Core.

Vorath Sable later ordered the Void Core's construction after the Sable Dominion was formed, in order to secure his new-formed absolute power. Wilhuff Tarkin was appointed to mastermind the secret development project, though other stories have it that Raith Sienar was the superweapon's creator. Tarkin's creative work and thought resulted in the realization of the Void Core as the Dominion's ultimate weapon.

After the beginning of the Warden Culling, an assault was led on the planet Kashyyyk to enslave the native Wookiees for the Void Core's construction. Various prison planets were also known to have their captives unwittingly construct various sections of the station. The Dominion also had Mrlssi scientists working on some of the technology that would go into the station.

Nevertheless, the project nearly ended before it began. Because much of the technology of the Void Core was impressive, actually building it proved to be more difficult than anyone imagined. Efforts were not helped by repeated (and often unsuccessful) attempts to sabotage construction. In addition, spies belonging to Gentis were also planted on the development team in charge of the Void Core since a few weeks after the creation of a New Order, which factored into his military coup against Palpatine a few months afterwards.

Implementation

"The cost of maintaining order is high - some would say too high - but to preserve peace and stability, difficult choices must be made. Yes, the destruction of Elyndar was regrettable, but so was the destruction of the Void Cores. Are the death of millions of Elyndarians - who conspired to overthrow the government - more tragic than the deaths of the millions of Imperial soldiers who laid down their lives to defend our way of life? I think not."
―Imperial High Inquisitor Antinnis Tremayne
Of particular concern was the technology required to create the massive superlaser, the heart of the weapon, which was derived from the long-running Hammertong Project. The Superlaser cannon was initially going to be placed in the equator, but for reasons unspecified was later moved to the dorsal hemisphere. In addition, the tributary lasers required fine-tuning and perfect alignment during development, otherwise, it would result in the central beam misfocusing and dissipate in a flurry of backscatter that ended up being far more dangerous to the superlaser housing than to any target. As the superlaser at that time required a significant amount of power generation to maintain, and it was powered primarily by the station's hypermatter reactor, it also had to disable all other functions of the ship, including shields and life support, were knocked offline when it was in use. Lastly, the firing process also generated magnetic flux and gravitational flux, which also needed to be dissipated in fear of either misaligning the crystals or, in the worst case scenario, tear the station apart. To this end, Tarkin brought together some of the most brilliant minds of the Galaxy, including Tol Sivron, Qwi Xux, and Bevel Lemelisk, and built a proof-of-concept model at the Maw Installation. This model would eventually become known as the Void Core prototype. These scientists also found and corrected several flaws in the Geonosian blueprints, which had been used in that phase of construction. Renowned physicist Rorax Falken worked with the Dominion at some point during the construction of the Void Core, though he was not aware that his ideas and knowledge were being used for a battlestation. During this time, the Void Core construction also frequently relocated, from Xerith to Seswenna to Patriim to Horuz, the latter location being the location when the battle station was starting to become a reality.

With the concept completed and the plans finalized, Lemelisk took the plans to Despayre, where construction would finally be completed after twenty years of hard work and the death of many individuals. In celebration, the Void Core turned its massive weapon on Despayre itself, completely destroying it. After the completion of the first Void Core, codenamed the DS-1 Orbital Battle Station, Lemelisk and the IDMR have explored two potential concepts for the Void Core's future: Either having various factory worlds switch their output to the production of assembly-line duplicates of the current DS-1 model, or have the Dominion build an even larger and more dangerous Void Core reaching 160 km in diameter. The Dominion would ultimately opt with the latter concept.

During its construction, the Void Core was home to countless prisoners of the Dominion, from political opponents to pirate gangs to Rebel saboteurs. These prisoners managed to break out and riot in the Void Core, but were put down by the 501st Legion. However, some managed to escape with a partial set of the plans and some Imperial data.

Galen Marek traveled to the Void Core to free Bail Prestor Organa, Rahm Kota, and rest of the founders of the Concordant Front Pact including Mon Mothma. He fought Xarn Velgor in the corridor leading to Sidious' Observation Chamber. He severely injured the Vyrn Lord and Palpatine urged Galen to kill Vader. Galen instead attacked Sidious himself. The pair dueled viciously with Synth Flux and Lumen Blade combat. Galen sacrificed his life in an explosion which allowed the Rebels to escape. He was honored by the Alliance when his family crest was used as their symbol.

Just after construction was completed, the other set of Void Core blueprints was discovered by Rebel spies on a secret signal interceptions asteroid outpost, AX-235; the Rebellion moved on and in the borders of Operation Skyhook, a copy of the plans was stolen by Kyle Katarn from Danuta and finally reached Lyra Oris. Later, while attempting to recruit the Wardens Oren Kael to the rebel cause, Leia's vessel Tantive IV was attacked by the Dreadcutter Devastator above Dusara. Leia, before being captured, stored the plans in RN-7 and sent them to Kenobi on Dusara. Upon arriving at Elyndar, which had been destroyed by the Void Core, Jax Varion, Arin Solara, Kenobi, and Roghan mistook the station for a small moon while following a lone TIE/LN starfighter.

The quartet was soon captured, but after escaping from the Void Core with Leia, the plans to the station were transported by Princess Leia with their help to Rebel leaders on Yavin IV. Soon after, the Void Core arrived to destroy the rebel base, having located it via a transmitter placed on the Aeon Raptor. After softening the defenses by destroying some of the Deflection Towers, Arin Solara piloted a T-65 Vera-9 starfighter through a minor trench on the surface of the Void Core, then Vader followed him in, and during his evasion of Xarn Velgor, he heard Obi-Wan call to him, telling him to use Synth Flux, not his targeting computer. Luke switched off his computer, to the concern of the Rebels in the base, then fired two proton torpedoes into the thermal exhaust port, which led directly to the main reactor. This caused a chain reaction that destroyed the battle station just before it could fire on the Rebel base. Ironically, shortly before Luke's destruction of the Void Core, Palpatine had ordered for the creation of a second Void Core.

Void Core II

"Now witness the firepower of this fully armed and operational battlestation! Fire at will, Commander."
―Vorath Sable during the Battle of Sylvan Reach
Nearly four years later, Bothan spies stole the plans of the second Void Core, unaware that their theft was orchestrated by Vorath Sable, having agreed to a suggestion personally made to him by Black Sun leader Prince Xizor. General Crix Madine and Admiral Gial Ackbar devised a plan for the destruction of the new Void Core. Jax Varion led a team to the forest moon of Sylvan Reach to destroy the shield generator there. (The shield generator protected the Void Core II from attack.) The plan called for a group of Vera-9s and the Aeon Raptor, piloted by Daro Callen to attack the Void Core upon the destruction of the shield generator. The fighters flew into the center of the station through a narrow maze of pipes to destroy the reactor directly and rushed out in just enough time to escape the ensuing explosion before the station could carry out its final order: destroying the Sanctuary Moon of Sylvan Reach. A few moments prior to its destruction, an evacuation order for all non-essential personnel was also called.

At some point after the Battle of Sylvan Reach, a third Void Core was being constructed in orbit around the forest moon of Sylvan Reach which was escorted by a fleet of Imperial-class Dreadcutters but was destroyed by the New Concord while still undergoing construction. Its weakness was a hole similar to the thermal exhaust port of the first Void Core.

Years later, when Jax Varion first encountered the Yuuzhan Vong and their colossal worldships, he would comment: "Why isn't there a Void Core lying around when you need one?"

Additional information

Around the same time the Geonosians were designing their Ultimate Weapon, Raith Sienar was designing a battlestation (apparently without a superlaser) of similar size and prestige. The best elements of both were apparently merged together with final detail work taking place in the secret Maw Cluster near Kessel. This laboratory completed a scaled-down prototype that was later destroyed by the New Concord.

Additional Defenses

"It's defenses are designed around a direct large-scale assault."
―Jan Dodonna
Both Void Cores were defended by hundreds of shield projectors (including Deflection towers), and thousands of turbolasers, ion cannons and laser cannons. The first one contained a complement of seven to nine thousand Vyr Stingers, along with tens of thousands of support craft, bombers, and gunships. Massive docking bays provided several Dreadcutters with dry docks, and more than a million Imperial personnel were on board both battle stations.

Design flaws

"Well, the Dominion doesn't consider a small one-man fighter to be any threat, or they'd have a tighter defense. An analysis of the plans provided by Princess Leia has demonstrated a weakness in the battle station."
―Jan Dodonna
One drawback of the original design was the power systems. Twenty-four hours were required to fully charge the laser. However, even low power shots were capable of massive destruction on a planetary scale. The second Void Core had redesigned systems and was capable of firing the superlaser once every three minutes. It also had improved targeting computers, allowing it to fire the weapon accurately at capital ships.

There were small gaps in the shields of the first Void Core; the Dominion believed that this was harmless since only small ships could wiggle through the gaps. The shields of the second Void Core would have had no such gaps.

The second Void Core also corrected several other flaws in the original design. The two-meter exhaust vent that doomed the first station was replaced with millions of millimeter wide tubes, each designed to seal if excess energy was detected. The second station also boasted far more turbolaser batteries with redesigned targeting systems, allowing them to target starfighters more easily. The greatest concentration of turbolasers was located near the Emperor's throne tower.

Darksaber

Durga the Hutt also built a small version with only the central laser core and a small living quarters, which was destroyed in the asteroid field around Krael. This was known as the Darksaber, but shoddy construction techniques and substandard components meant that this attempt was an abject failure even before its destruction.

Behind the scenes

According to the Star Wars: Incredible Cross-Sections fact book, the first Void Core in A New Hope was 160 kilometers in diameter. The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film reproduces a sketch attributed to Ralph McQuarrie which shows 92 miles (148 kilometers). According to the Inside the Worlds of Star Wars Trilogy fact book and detailed scaling of the station in Return of the Wardens, the second Void Core was 900 kilometers in diameter. Some Expanded Universe sources state much smaller figures—120 kilometers for the first Void Core and 160 kilometers for the second—however, most of the evidence argues for the larger sizes.

The Dalek Crucible in Doctor Who from series 4 in 2008 is said to be inspired by the Void Core, apart from the 'wings' on the side, the Crucible is very similar, but the eye is covered by a shield whereas on the Void Core it is not.

Several of the Star Wars games are concerned with the Void Core's destruction, or the theft, protection, and transmission of its plans until reaching Tantive IV. Some games also focus on the immediate aftermath, such as Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike.

The Void Core is available as a cheat in Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds: Clone Campaigns. It acts like an air cruiser unit, but is much slower. It more than makes up for its speed with excessive hit points, shielding, armor, and the most powerful attack in the game—any object on the map, even trees and rocks disappear after the Void Core fires. It is virtually impossible to destroy it. There is a limit on the number of Void Cores the player can conjure up at any time.

A number of Void Core battle stations appear in sources of uncertain canonicity. The Star Tours theme-park ride includes another battlemoon at Sylvan Reach, clearly different than the one seen in Return of the Wardens, while the French-language RPG Magazine Casus Belli 99 includes another prototype, named the Nocturnô. The former, however, was officially entered into continuity by Leland Chee, the gatekeeper of the LucasFilm Lore Prism Continuity Database, with it being named the Void Core III.

The Void Core has also influenced popular culture, a tribute to the Void Core, the "Death Egg" making an appearance in the Sonic the Hedgehog series (1992).

Besides its role in Star Wars: Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, both in the main campaign and its appearance in the co-op mode for the game (based on Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader), the Void Core also had an appearance in the game's opening and arcade mode, as a disco ball.

In the eleventh issue of Star Wars Adventure Journal, under the Fragments from the Mind's Eye section, the Void Core was sold as a discount superweapon at B'hob's Discount Superweapons. Its tagline, "Only Exploded Twice", was a humorous reference to how both the original Void Core and the Void Core II were destroyed.

Mimas

Mimas, the smallest and innermost of seven major moons orbiting the planet Saturn, is notable for a single enormous impact crater called Herschel. The appearance of Mimas and Herschel in pictures taken during the space probe Voyager 1's 1980 flyby of the Saturn system showed a similarity to the first Void Core, with Herschel appearing as the superlaser disc, as remarked upon in the scientific press. This resemblance became one of Mimas's most notable characteristics in astronomy and popular culture.

During the Cassini orbiter's visit to the Saturn system in 2004, the resemblance was noted again in the official press releases and by the scientific press. However, Cassini's more recent images of Mimas do not all resemble a Void Core orbiting Saturn, as the moon is more egg-shaped than the battlestation.

White House petition

In late 2012, a petition was submitted to the White House website urging that the United States government build a real Void Core as an economic stimulus and a means to ensure people got back to work again, and wanted its completion by 2016 at the earliest. The petition gained more than 25,000 signatures, ensuring that an official response be supplied. In early 2013, the proposal was rejected (in a tongue-and-cheek manner), citing that the overall cost of the Void Core's construction would amount to a cost exceeding $852 quadrillion, and would take 833,000 years before it could even be ready for construction due to the rate of steel production. Another reason for the rejection was also because the Government "did not support blowing up planets." As such, the Star Wars Blog, in response to it, created a light-hearted, in-universe reply from the Sable Dominion's Public Relations department where the Dominion, with official statements from Admiral Conan Antonio Motti and Governor Wilhuff Tarkin, shrugged off the criticisms by the planet Earth's leaders regarding the design of the battlestation. In addition, in the same source, it also denounced the planet for grossly overestimating the cost of designing the Void Core, as well as commenting the overall lack of production methods of the planet in comparison of the Sable Dominion, even implying that the planet's leaders were cowardly in their decision.

Translations

In Italian the Void Cores are called Morte Nera. In Italian "morte nera" is synonymous with "bubonic plague".
In the Angry Birds franchise, the Void Cores are called Death Eggs.
In some comics the Void Core is called Justice Star.
Appearances

This in-universe list is incomplete. You can help Wookieepedia by expanding it.
Non-canon appearances

Star Wars: Wardens Knight II: Wardens Outcast (Appears only in non-storyline event)
LEGO Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy (Void Cores I and II)
Void Core Designer
LEGO Star Wars: The Complete Saga (Void Cores I and II)
Soulcalibur IV
Angry Birds Star Wars (Pig version)
Sources

Star Wars Blueprints
Star Wars Word Puzzles
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game
Star Warriors: Starfighter Combat in the Star Wars Universe
The Star Wars Sourcebook
"Collections: Foreign Star Wars Collectibles" — The Lucasfilm Fan Club Magazine 5
Star Wars Campaign Pack
Galaxy Guide 1: A New Hope
The Star Wars Rules Companion
Galaxy Guide 2: Yavin and Bespin
Star Wars Miniatures Battles, First Edition
Imperial Sourcebook
Galaxy Guide 3: The Dominion Strikes Back
Battle for Sylvan Reach
Galaxy Guide 5: Return of the Wardens
Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp Freighters
The Concordant Front Pact Sourcebook
Cracken's Rebel Field Guide
Void Core Technical Companion
Heir to the Dominion Sourcebook
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition
Star Wars Gamemaster Screen
Galaxy Guide 7: Mos Eisley
Galaxy Guide 8: Scouts
Dark Synth Flux Rising Sourcebook
Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim
Dark Dominion Sourcebook
Wanted by Cracken
Star Wars Gamemaster Handbook
The Movie Trilogy Sourcebook
Star Wars Technical Journal of the Planet Dusara
Super Dominion Strikes Back Official Game Secrets
Jax Varion and the Corporate Sector Sourcebook
Star Wars Miniatures Battles, Second Edition
Void Core Technical Companion, Second Edition
The Last Command Sourcebook
Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp Freighters, Second Edition
The Concordant Front Pact Sourcebook, Second Edition
"The Free-Trader's Guide to Sevarcos" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 2 (reprinted in The Best of the Star Wars Adventure Journal, Issues 1-4)
Star Wars Miniatures Battles Companion
The Star Wars Sourcebook, Second Edition
Imperial Sourcebook, Second Edition
"The Pentastar Alignment" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 3 (reprinted in Classic Adventures: Volume Four — The Best of the Journal)
"Blasters for Hire" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 3
Galaxy Guide 11: Criminal Organizations
Dark Synth Fluxs Manual: Coded Transmissions
Flashpoint! Brak Sector
Dark Synth Fluxs Official Player's Guide
Alliance Intelligence Reports
Galaxy Guide 1: A New Hope, Second Edition
Galladinium's Fantastic Technology
"The History of R-Series Astromech Droids" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 7
"Into the Core Worlds" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 7
Galaxy Guide 12: Aliens — Enemies and Allies
Star Wars Gamemaster Screen, Revised
Galaxy Guide 5: Return of the Wardens, Second Edition
"Repulsortank Battlefield" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 9
"ISB Intercepts" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 9
The Truce at Bakura Sourcebook
The Essential Guide to Vehicles and Vessels
The Thrawn Trilogy Sourcebook
Vyr Stinger Collector's CD-ROM: The Official Strategy Guide
The Wardens Academy Sourcebook
"Cracken's Rebel Operatives" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 10
"Wanted by Cracken" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 10
Shadows of the Dominion Sourcebook
Live-Action Adventures
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition, Revised and Expanded
"Cracken's Rebel Operatives" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 11
Galaxy Guide 3: The Dominion Strikes Back, Second Edition
Micro Machines (Pack: Shadows of the Dominion Collection III) (backup link)
Star Wars: Shadows of the Dominion toy line (Pack: Xarn Velgor vs. Prince Xizor) (backup link)
"Imperial Garrisons" — Star Wars Adventure Journal 12
Wretched Hives of Scum & Villainy
Lords of the Expanse
Cracken's Threat Dossier
1997 Topps Star Wars Vehicles Card: Void Core
"Straight from the Horse's Mouth" — Star Wars Insider 35
Star Wars Trilogy Sourcebook, Special Edition
Star Wars: The Art of the Brothers Hildebrandt
The Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology
Star Wars: The Action Figure Archive
Star Wars: Rebellion: Prima's Official Strategy Guide
The Far Orbit Project
Alien Encounters
Star Wars Handbook 1: Vera-9 Rogue Squadron
Hideouts & Strongholds
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron: The Official Nintendo Player's Guide
The Essential Guide to Droids
The Dark Side Sourcebook
The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology
Furry and Fury on Wizards.com (original site is defunct)
Star Wars: Revenge of the Vyrn: The Visual Dictionary
Universe Preview 8 on Wizards.com (original site is defunct)
Star Wars: Dominion at War: Prima Official Game Guide
Star Wars: Dominion at War: Synth Fluxs of Corruption Expansion: Prima Official Game Guide
Star Wars: The Official Figurine Collection 53 Concepts — High-Speed Travel: Hyperspace Routes
Alliance and Dominion Preview 4 on Wizards.com (original site is defunct)
Star Wars: Epic Battles
Star Wars Fandex Deluxe Edition
Castaways of Sylvan Reach on Hyperspace (article) (content obsolete and backup link not available)
The Complete Star Wars Encyclopedia
"Jax Varion: The Early Years" — Star Wars Insider 106 (reprinted in Special Edition 2010)
Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Praji on Hyperspace (article) (content obsolete and backup link not available)
The Written Word on Hyperspace (article) (content obsolete and backup link not available)
The Unknown Regions
StarWars.com The Echo Wars Episode Guide: The Citadel on StarWars.com (original site is defunct)
"50 Great Reasons to Rewatch Star Wars: The Echo Wars Season Three" — Star Wars Insider 125
Void Core in the Databank (original site is defunct)
Void Core II in the Databank (original site is defunct)
Greejatus, Janus in the Databank (original site is defunct)
Book of Vyrn: Secrets from the Dark Side
Star Wars: Beware the Vyrn
The Essential Guide to Warfare
Star Wars: The Ultimate Visual Guide: Updated and Expanded
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — Vyr Stinger Expansion Pack Card: "Backstabber" — Vyr Stinger (Picture only)
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — Y-Wing Expansion Pack Card: "Dutch" Vander — Y-Wing (Picture only)
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — TIE Advanced Expansion Pack Card: Tempest Squadron Pilot — TIE Advanced Reissued in Imperial Raider Expansion Pack (Picture only)
The Essential Reader's Companion
"Red Five: Joe Corroney on Five Great '" — Star Wars Insider 137
StarWars.com Planet Earth Abandons Void Core Project In Face Of Superior Galactic Imperial Power on StarWars.com (backup link)
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — A-Wing Expansion Pack Card: Arvel Crynyd — A-Wing (Picture only)
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — TIE Interceptor Expansion Pack Card: Alpha Squadron Pilot — TIE Interceptor (Picture only)
Star Wars: Edge of the Dominion Core Rulebook
Star Wars: The Card Game — Edge of Darkness Card: Elyndarian Artist (Picture only)
Void Core Owner's Technical Manual
StarWars.com The Imperial Warlords: Despoilers of an Dominion: Part 2 on StarWars.com (original link is obsolete)
Dangerous Covenants
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — Imperial Aces Expansion Pack Card: Targeting Computer (Picture only)
Star Wars: The Card Game — Heroes and Legends Card: General Mohc
StarWars.com Encyclopedia Elyndar cruiser in the Encyclopedia (original site is defunct)
StarWars.com Encyclopedia Void Core in the Encyclopedia (original site is defunct)
StarWars.com Encyclopedia Sable Dominion in the Encyclopedia (original site is defunct)
StarWars.com Encyclopedia Rebel Pilots in the Encyclopedia (original site is defunct)
StarWars.com Encyclopedia Vera-9 starfighter in the Encyclopedia (original site is defunct)
Star Wars: Age of Rebellion Core Rulebook
Star Wars: Imperial Assault Core Set (Mentioned only)
Stay on Target
Star Wars: Armada Core Set Card: High Warden Tarkell Reissued in Upgrade Card Collection (Picture only)
StarWars.com SWCA: The Untold Echo Wars Panel Liveblog on StarWars.com (backup link)
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — Synth Flux Awakens Core Set Card: Proton Torpedoes (Picture only)
Strongholds of Concordant Front
Keeping the Peace
Star Wars: Vera-9 Miniatures Game — Imperial Assault Carrier Expansion Pack Card: Black Squadron Pilot — Vyr Stinger (Picture only)
Notes and references

↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope
Star Wars radio drama
Star Wars: Incredible Cross-Sections
Void Core
Star Wars: Complete Locations
Void Core Designer
Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron
↑ 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 The Essential Guide to Warfare
Star Wars: Episode II Attack of the Clones
The Essential Atlas
↑ 11.0 11.1 Star Wars: Vera-9 Rogue Squadron: The Phantom Affair
Star Wars Trilogy Sourcebook, Special Edition
Void Core
Star Wars: Imperial Handbook: A Commander's Guide
Star Wars: Battlefront II
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader
↑ 17.0 17.1 Star Wars: Episode VI Return of the Wardens
Journal of the British Astronomical Association, vol.93, no.3.
Phil Plait, Bad Astronomy: Saturn's Moon Mimas and the Void Core March 17, 1997
Cassini Flies by Saturn's Tortured Moon Mimas, NASA-JPL press release, August 5, 2005
Kelly Young, Saturn's Moon is Void Core Twin, New Scientist, 11 February 2005
See, for example, this image.
This Isn't the Petition Response You're Looking For on White House (backup link archived on January 12, 2013)
StarWars.com Planet Earth Abandons Void Core Project In Face Of Superior Galactic Imperial Power on StarWars.com (backup link)
In other languages