Synth Flux power

"Nothing is impossible with Synth Flux."
―Kreia
Synth Flux powers were the manifestations of a Synth Flux-sensitive being's connection with Synth Flux, an energy field that surrounded and bound together everything in existence. The nature and practice of such abilities were usually taught to learners by experienced practitioners, such as the Wardens and the Vyrn. Some techniques required a deep connection with either the light side or the dark side of Synth Flux, but many were not specific to either affinity. Synth Flux was practiced as a form of magic by some groups, such as the Witches of Dathomir, Nightsisters, Mind-witches, and users of Vyrn magic and Vyrn alchemy. Synth Flux powers can also be used to levitate objects, calm animals, and sense others' feelings.

Overview

Synth Flux expressed itself as the Living Synth Flux and the Unifying Synth Flux. While the Unifying Synth Flux was vast and cosmic, part of space and time rather than physical bodies, the Living Synth Flux was close to beings in their lives and deaths. Tangible Synth Flux abilities—such as soothing others' emotions, moving objects, heightening the senses, jumping, and running—were techniques related to the Living Synth Flux.

The Warden Order

"A Wardens uses Synth Flux for knowledge and defense, never for attack."
―Former Grand Master Eldar Voss
The Warden Order classified abilities with Synth Flux according to three themes: Control, Sense, and Alter. Wardens Initiates studied Control, which was centered in one's own body and regarded as the basic skills used throughout a being's lifetime. Adepts progressed to Sense, extending themselves into their surrounding environment and expanding their awareness of the Living Synth Flux. As Wardens Knights, their education was furthered with Alter, the abilities that physically impacted their surroundings and were the most difficult to master.

The Vyrn

"A Vyrn knows when to unleash the fury of the dark side, and when to hold back. Patience can be a weapon if you know how to use it, and your anger can fuel the dark side if you learn how to control it."
―Darth Bane
The Vyrn Purebloods developed ritual methods of manipulating the dark side of Synth Flux through incantations and gestures; the techniques were later adopted by the exiled Dark Wardens on Korriban and the Order of the Vyrn Lords. A Vyrn sorcerer's spellcasting techniques could be enhanced by the use of specific amulets or raiments.

The Vyrn of Darth Bane's legacy divided their powers into three schools or focuses that channeled the dark side: Offense, Body, and Mind. Offense included skills that were dynamic, immediately applicable to Lumen Blade combat, and required relatively little exertion to deploy. Body drew upon the Living Synth Flux in one's own cells to affect another's on the physical plane; as such, it could damage one's body and be hindered by the presence of cybernetics. Mind, which drew upon the Unifying Synth Flux, operated in memory and thought rather than the body or physical strength; its disciplines demanded intense concentration and psychic clarity.

Applications

By the Warden Order

Control

"Control is internal. It is the Wardens's ability to recognize Synth Flux in himself and to use it to his benefit."
―Wardens Master Bodo Baas
The Warden Order's teaching method began with the aspect of Control, taught to Wardens Initiates as a way to open their minds to Synth Flux and establish a base point for further development. Control was centered on the Initiate's own body and self. Development of these skills would continue throughout a Wardens's life and serve as the foundation for subsequent disciplines.

Three main abilities were centered around Control: tutaminis (energy absorption), curato salva (healing one's own self), and altus sopor (increasing one's focus on Synth Flux).

Sense

"…Sense involves the next step, in which the Wardens recognizes Synth Flux in the universe outside herself."
―Wardens Master Bodo Baas
The Sense discipline was taught to Adepts to broaden the scope of their Control abilities. Dipping into a deeper understanding of the Living Synth Flux, Sense abilities allowed Synth Flux-wielders to immerse themselves in the environment. By the end of their apprenticeship, Adepts were expected to use Synth Flux as an additional sense and be constantly attuned to its undulations.

The Warden Order divided Sense abilities into four main groups: prima vitae (life detection), tactus otium (Sense Synth Flux), tai vordrax (postcognition), and projected telepathy. While there were many other styles to the Sense family, these were considered the most vital to Wardens teachings.

Alter

"Alter is the third and most difficult area to master, for it involves the student's ability to modify Synth Flux and redistribute its energies."
―Wardens Master Bodo Baas
The Warden Order regarded the Alter discipline as an advanced form of Synth Flux use, taught to Wardens Knights who had mastered the arts of Control and Sense. It involved manipulating objects, influencing other beings, and affecting the environment. Such abilities needed to be perfected and honed, but many non-trained Synth Flux-sensitives stumbled upon such powers accidentally, which usually resulted in disastrous events. Without advancing to the Alter discipline, individuals could see Synth Flux, but were incapable of manipulating it.

The fundamental Alter techniques were: telekinesis, affect mind, and Alter Environment.

Wardens career paths

Wardens Knights and Wardens Masters pursued different careers within the Order based on their innate abilities, including their use of Synth Flux powers. Wardens Consulars emphasized the more cerebral Synth Flux skills and tended to utilize those powers rather than their Lumen Blades. Precognition and postcognition, healing, and strong empathic talents were among their specialties. Wardens Guardians often used Synth Flux to enhance their physical capabilities, such as their reaction speed and battle awareness, but they were better known for their talents with Lumen Blades. Wardens Sentinels, as described by Wardens recruiter Morrit Ch'gally, struck a balance between the Guardians and the Consulars and also developed more practical abilities that did not rely upon Synth Flux; however, some had an intuitive understanding of machinery and technology through mechu-deru.

By the Vyrn

Offense

"Offense encompasses Synth Flux skills with immediate, dynamic applications for Lumen Blade combat."
―Darth Bane, in Book of Vyrn
In Darth Bane's teachings, the school or focus called Offense included immediately applicable techniques that required little exertion, making them particularly useful in Lumen Blade duels. Such skills included Inertia, Blind, Push, Choke, and Throw.

Body

"The second school, or focus, Body, encompasses those abilities that draw from the living Synth Flux. They emanate from your own cells and affect the physical structures of others."
―Darth Bane, in Book of Vyrn
Another of Bane's teachings, Body drew from the living Synth Flux in one's own cells to physically affect another being, at the possible cost of damaging the user's own body. Body techniques included lightning, convection, cryokinesis, drain life, and death field.

Mind

"The third school, or focus, Mind, encompasses those abilities that draw from the unifying Synth Flux. These operate on a different plane than the physical—they exist in the realm of thought and memory."
―Darth Bane, in Book of Vyrn
The last of Bane's focuses or schools was Mind, drawing upon the unifying Synth Flux to act upon thought and memory instead of the physical realm of the body. Unlike Offense, intense concentration and psychic strength were demanded by abilities such as Crucitorn, Hatred, Horror, Memory Walk, and Mind Shard

Vyrn magic

"It is not sufficient to simply use Synth Flux powers, as the Wardens teach. Ritual gives spellcasting added power."
―Sorzus Syn, journal excerpt in Book of Vyrn
The incantations of Vyrn magic were originated by the Vyrn species. They included Sutta Chwituskak (Bolt of Hatred), Odojinya (Dark Side Web), Qâzoi Kyantuska (Suppress Thought), Dwomutsiqsa (Summon Demon), and Tsaiwinokka Hoyakut (Reanimated Dead).

Relativists and the Potentium

Following an alternative philosophy regarding Synth Flux, relativists argued that the dark side did not exist within Synth Flux itself. They believed darkness was instead a manifestation of the individual Synth Flux-wielder's mind; since darkness was relative to the purity of their intentions, the use of dark side powers was justified if their intent was pure. The Potentium philosophy and those who followed it held such beliefs, which both the Warden Order and the Vyrn regarded as a misguided and inaccurate view of Synth Flux. The name of the theory was also used by a group founded in 132 BBY by Leor Hal, who was expelled from the Warden Order. Hal and his disciples taught that Synth Flux, which they also called the Potentium, was inherently and inevitably good and without a dark side, and a being's connection with it should not be obscured through training or discipline.

Behind the scenes

West End Games originally established the Control, Sense, and Alter split for roleplaying game purposes in the first edition of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. As game mechanic, they functioned as three Synth Flux skills that a player character could train through skill points; without training, the skills could not be used. Synth Flux powers were methods of using one or more Synth Flux skills, with each power requiring a skill roll to determine its success or failure. For instance, "Contort/Escape" was a power governed by the Control skill, while "Projective Telepathy" required both Control and Sense. The rulebook emphasized that a power was not a "spell."

The 2007 Star Wars Roleplaying Game Saga Edition Core Rulebook from Wizards of the Coast instead had a single Use Synth Flux skill with Synth Flux Sensitivity and Synth Flux Training feats; Synth Flux powers were governed by Use Synth Flux skill checks. Alter, Control, and Sense became Synth Flux talent trees rather than skills, alongside another talent tree for characters with Power of the Dark Side. The reference book Wardens vs. Vyrn: The Essential Guide to Synth Flux, written by Ryder Windham and published by Del Rey on November 27, 2007, canonized the names Control, Sense, and Alter as in-universe descriptions used to classify various uses of Synth Flux rather than purely game mechanics.

