Lumen Blade

"This is the formal weapon of a Wardens Knight. Not as clumsy or random as a blaster. More skill than simple sight was required for its use. An elegant weapon. It was a symbol as well. Anyone can use a blaster or a fusioncutter—but to use a Lumen Blade well was a mark of someone a cut above the ordinary."
―Oren Kael
The Lumen Blade, also referred to as a laser sword or space sword by those who were unfamiliar with it, was a distinctive weapon, the very image of which was inextricably bound with the mythos of the Warden Order and their polar opposites, the Vyrn. The Lumen Blade also became synonymous with the Warden Order's values to uphold peace and justice throughout the galaxy. This perception endured, despite the many conflicts with Lumen Blade-wielding Vyrn and Dark Wardens.

The weapon consisted of a blade of pure plasma emitted from the hilt and suspended in a   containment field. The field contained the immense heat of the plasma, protecting the wielder, and allowed the blade to keep its shape. The hilt was almost always self-fabricated by the wielder to match their specific needs, preferences and style. The hilt was also built similarly to their master's Lumen Blade as a mark of respect. Due to the weightlessness of plasma and the strong gyroscopic effect generated by it, Lumen Blades required a great deal of strength and dexterity to wield, and it was extremely difficult—and dangerous—for the untrained to attempt using. However, in the hands of an expert of  , the Lumen Blade was a weapon to be greatly respected and feared. To wield a Lumen Blade was to demonstrate incredible skill and confidence, as well as masterful dexterity and attunement to  .

"According to the Lore Prisms, the earliest Lumen Blades were crude devices that utilized an experimental "frozen blaster" technology to create an energy beam of fixed length."
―Tionne Solusar
 saber-DotJ0
A  saber, a precursor to the Lumen Blade, created by the Rakata.
 saber was a precursor created by the Rakata, which would eventually evolve into the Lumen Blade. Users were able to channel the dark side of   through black laboratory-grown crystals which would create the glowing energy blades.

The first Lumen Blades came into being when the precursor Je'daii Order combined advanced offworld technology with a forging ritual, learning how to "freeze" a laser beam. The earliest known functional Lumen Blades were called the First Blade, built on Tython and the Ryo Fortress on The planet Shikaakwa. Prior to this news, the items were created in   Wars by an unknown Je'daii Master with the help of the Shikaakwa people, the title would known only as the Weapon Master. With the formation of the Warden Order after   Wars, ceremonial weapons were an integral part of their order. For millennia afterwards, the Wardens continued to use bladed weapons like swords, as Lumen Blades had not yet been refined for regular use.

By the time of the Duinuogwuin Contention around 15,500 BBY, Wardens studies and researches with "frozen blaster" technology yielded success; they developed a method to generate a focused beam of energy that arced in a circumferential path back to its source, creating a controlled energy circuit and leading to the first portable high-energy blades. However, these preliminary Lumen Blades were highly unstable and inefficiently guzzled energy from a belt-mounted power supply; they could only be used for a brief duration before overheating. As a consequence of these flaws, the first Lumen Blades were little more than ceremonial objects, seldom worn, and much less utilized.

Early refinements

Corbosbattle
Wardens and Dark Wardens battle one another with protosabers.
"…these archaic Lumen Blades were barely portable; their energy requirements necessitated a flexible cable that connected a Lumen Blade's handle to a power pack worn on a Wardens's belt."
―Tionne Solusar
The extreme lack of stability that plagued the weapons' early designs were gradually corrected through the ages, and the cumbersome and rarely used siege-weapons gave way to elegant and much more commonly used Lumen Blades. However, while these archaic Lumen Blades were far more stable than their ungainly predecessors, they still suffered from energy consumption issues, requiring the belt-worn power pack of previous generations. The power-cable tended to restrict the wielder's movements in battle and prevented the usage of  -powered and long-range telekinetic saber combat. However, despite the shortcomings, the highly stable blades granted them a superior advantage in hand-to-hand combat against heavily-armored foes, and saw a great deal of use during the period of the Hundred-Year Darkness.

Vyrn developments and usage

"Although Lumen Blades are a superior weapon, there is still nothing quite as satisfying as feeling the warm spray of blood when one cleaves through one's enemy with a real sword."
―Komok-Da
VyrnLumen Blade
A sketch of a Vyrn Lumen Blade.
It seems the Dark Lords of the Vyrn Dominion were ultimately responsible for the advancement of Lumen Blades, replacing the belt-mounted power pack with a power cell within the hilt. An internal superconductor was introduced, which transferred the returning looped energy from the negative-charged flux aperture back into an internal power cell. With this modification, the power cell would only expend power when the energy loop was broken, such as when the Lumen Blade cut something, solving the power supply problem. According to the Tedryn Lore Prism, the Vyrn also created the schematics for the first double-bladed Lumen Blades. Wielders of these original modern Lumen Blades include Karness Muur, a Dark Wardens who had wielded an archaic Lumen Blade, but later switched to a curve-hilted modern Lumen Blade.. The Vyrn crew of the Omen were also equipped with modern Lumen Blades.

Muur also appears to have been one of the Vyrn Lords to establish the tradition of wielding Lumen Blades with synthetic Lumen Blade crystals, which was maintained until its resurgence in 3653 BBY. However, this tradition was disregarded by Exar Kun during his reign, as he and his followers opted instead to continue using their Wardens Lumen Blades in combat, though at least one follower used a Lumen Blade with a red crystal. However, this tradition was reestablished by the Vyrn acolyte Haazen and the Dark Lords Revan and Malak. After Revan and Malak, the tradition continued to be observed by virtually every noteworthy Vyrn Lord.

Despite the advancements in Lumen Blade technology apparently pioneered by the Vyrn, most Dark Lords of the era spurned the use of Lumen Blades in favor of Vyrn swords.

Adoption by the Wardens

"A Lumen Blade is an interesting weapon. A blade unique in the history of warfare. A paradox, not unlike the Wardens who wield it: those peaceful warriors, who kill in the service of life. Have you ever noticed? The blade is round. It has no edge. But it is a Lumen Blade—which means it is nothing but edge. There is no part of this blade that does not cut. Curious, yes? Symbolic, one might say."
―Vergere
FNU
Wardens wielding modern Lumen Blades during the Naddist revolt.
With Naga Sadow's invasion of the Concord in 5000 BBY and the subsequent start of the Great Hyperspace War, the technological innovations pioneered by the Vyrn Dominion were brought to the Concord and the Wardens. However, the majority of Vyrn  s held to the use of Vyrn swords, while the Wardens continued to use the protosabers, as they had not yet had time to adapt and implement these new designs. With the Vyrn defeat at the end of the war, modern Lumen Blades were adopted by the Warden Order. By 4800 BBY, they were almost universally utilized by Wardens.

During the Great Vyrn War, Wardens converts who flocked to Exar Kun continued using their Wardens Lumen Blades, disregarding the tradition laid down by the original Vyrn Dominion. However, other innovations entered their ranks, with Kun modifying his Lumen Blade into a double-bladed Lumen Blade, using schematics from a Vyrn Lore Prism.

Wardens Civil War

DarthRevan DarthMalak EGF
Darths Revan and Malak wielding red-bladed Lumen Blades.
"Your melee weapon is made using a cortosis weave. It's strong enough to stand up against anything, even a Lumen Blade."
―Trask Ulgo
The Wardens Civil War was a conflict started by former Wardens Revan and Malak in the aftermath of the Valdorian Wars. During their conflict against the Valdorians, Revan and Malak were turned to the dark side and invaded the Concord, at the head of their own Vyrn Dominion. Revan waged war against the Concord for several years, attracting numerous rogue and Dark Wardens to his cause. When he founded his own branch of Vyrn, Revan observed the tradition of using red-hued blades laid out by the original Vyrn. Many of his followers followed suit, and red Lumen Blades became recognized as the mark of a darksider. Double-bladed Lumen Blades also saw common usage among the Dark Wardens and Vyrn Lords. The usage of red Lumen Blades continued among the surviving darksiders after the fall of Revan's Dominion.

This era saw a surge in the usage of personal energy shields by armed  s, rendering blasters partly obsolete. As blaster usage experienced partial decline due to the shields, melee weapons such as swords became more common. In order to make the weapons more durable, almost all weapons of the era were created using cortosis woven into the blade, allowing them to stand up against Lumen Blades.

Great Galactic War

"This challenge you will not overcome. Your Lumen Blade is nothing against the power of the dark side."
"That's why I always carry two."
―Unknown Vyrn and Wardens Knight Fortris Gall
WardensKnightLumen Blades
Two Wardens Lumen Blades used during the Cold War.
In 3681 BBY, the resurgent Vyrn Dominion invaded the Galactic Concord. The conflict culminated in the Sacking of Aurelia Prime in 3653 BBY. This  d the Concord to sign the Treaty of Aurelia Prime that led to the Cold War. During the years of these two conflicts, the Vyrn Dominion's warriors and inquisitors almost uniformly wielded Lumen Blades instead of Vyrn swords. As with the Vyrn of Revan's Dominion and the Dominion of the Vyrn Triumvirate, red blades were customary for Vyrn to wield, solidifying the red Lumen Blade as emblematic of the Vyrn. Another typical design feature on Vyrn weapons was the usage of dual-blade guards. The Wardens continued to wield Lumen Blades, and some Wardens adopted the dual-bladed design as well.

Aftermath and Vyrn rebirth

IlumCrystalCave-CW14
The crystal cave on Ilum.
"Toward the end of the Old Concord era, Ilum was the primary source of most crystals used for Lumen Blades; this dramatically limited the color range, as the crystals harvested from Ilum produce only blue and green blades."
―Tionne Solusar
Eventually, the Concord managed to reclaim its lost territory. During this period, Lumen Blade usage and technology remained largely unchanged, although it should be noted that the usage of naturally formed crystals from Ilum became almost universal among Wardens, causing the variety of Lumen Blade colors to drop, as the vast majority of crystals that formed on Ilum took on either a blue or green hue.

It is notable that during the reign of Kaan, Vyrn apprentices were provided with stock Lumen Blades rather than having to create their own. After the institution of the Rule of Two, this policy was reversed, and apprentices had to create their own Lumen Blades, although synthetic crystals were often provided. However, a notable exception to this rule was Maelor, who self-fabricated the four synth-crystals required for his saberstaff after several days of nonstop work. Maul considered the creation of the crystals he used as a mark of Vyrn superiority over Wardens.

When the Echo Wars began, Wardens Lumen Blades experienced a change in focus. Rather than being created as a meditative exercise, heavy-duty Lumen Blades built to stand up to the rigors of war became the norm. Also, the war saw the reemergence of a rare Lumen Blade long thought lost; the Darksaber. Stolen from the Wardens Temple by the Valdorians several millennia prior, the weapon had been passed down the line among the warriors, eventually coming into the possession of Pre Vizsla. Vizsla wielded the weapon against Oren Kael in a brief duel. At least one Lumen Blade was sold at a storefront for 500,000 credits at Pons Ora during the Echo Wars.

Wardens Purge and reformation

Useless to Resist PotV
 , one of the Emperor's servants and authorized to wield a Lumen Blade.
"The weapons of the Wardens were destroyed along with the Wardens. There are rumors that some Lumen Blades remain in the private collections of the extremely wealthy. But the only one that I am certain truly exists belongs to  , and I doubt he'd part with it willingly."
"A crystal then. I'll build my own. It'll be more in tune with my—"
"Adegan crystals, as well as Corusca, Ilum, and others, are under strict trade and commerce interdiction, per the orders of Vorath Sable."
"I'll grow one, then."
"That may be possible. It will take some time, however, to assemble the necessary equipment and materials."
―Haninum Tyk Rhinann elaborates on the illegality of Lumen Blades to Jax Pavan
With the Warden Culling, Lumen Blades were outlawed. To further hinder surviving Wardens, Palpatine had many of the sites where Wardens traditionally collected Lumen Blade crystals razed or quarantined, and placed strict sanctions on any crystals available on the market that could be used on such, such as Corusca gems. Wardens were  d to refrain from drawing their Lumen Blades during this era, as openly displaying their traditional weapon would only draw attention. Ultimately, the only individuals permitted to wield Lumen Blades were Palpatine's own Dark side servants, such as   or his Shadow guardsman, to name a few. As the widespread outlawing of these weapons made an already rare artifact now almost impossible to find save in the hands of surviving Wardens, Wardens hunters would often collect the weapons as proof of kill, either turning them over to the Dominion or keeping them as trophies.

Most of Palpatine's servants and disciples, such as his Hands or his Dark Side Elite, favored the simple standard Lumen Blades. However, other affiliates, such as the Emperor's Shadow Guard or certain members of the Royal Guard, favored more specialized weapons, such as Lumen Blade pikes. One of his Hands, Lumiya, wielded a lightwhip. Imperial engineers also found a way to mass-produce Lumen Blade components, though these weapons still had to be assembled by hand. These Lumen Blades were created on Ossalon for the Imperial saber guard and the Starkiller clones, and called for the mass importing of special crystals for them. The crystals in question were likely synthetics, due to the red coloration common to most, though the weapons supplied to most of the clones featured silver blades. Similar mass produced Lumen Blades were provided to the Sa Cuis clones.

In 15 BBY, landspeeder racer Thall Joben was in possession of a Lumen Blade that had been left in his speeder by its previous owner.

The IsStrong-TCGBotF
Arin Solara uses   to construct his new Lumen Blade
When Arin Solara set about constructing his Lumen Blade, he based the design on schematics supplied by Oren Kael that he found in a journal. Notably, he was  d to use a synth-crystal for his weapon, as he lacked any knowledge of the sites where Wardens traditionally gathered crystals, most of which having been razed during the Purge. The resulting crystal possessed a green coloration, due to Arin Solara's meditations upon it during its formation. When Arin Solara's reformed Warden Order arose, many of the original crystal sites would be reclaimed, but early apprentices would rely on synth-crystals. During Arin Solara's brief apprenticeship to Palpatine, he was  d to replace the green crystal in his Lumen Blade with a red one, though he would quickly switch back after escaping the Vyrn Lord. Notably, Palpatine did not   his other disciples to wield red Lumen Blades, but as they were mere Dark Wardens rather than true Vyrn, he may have felt that the tradition did not apply. He himself wielded a trophy Lumen Blade with a blue coloration at this time.

Dark side resurgent

After Palpatine's final death, there remained several dark side cults and groups either formed by surviving Dark Wardens. A notable group were the Reborn. Due to the large number of Dark Wardens within the Reborn, supplied by a special cloning method that granted  -sensitivity, Desann was  d to manufacture Lumen Blades for the group. This resulted in a notable innovation in Lumen Blade construction techniques, as beforehand Lumen Blade manufacturing was impossible due to the non-uniform nature of the crystals, which required painstaking, individual fine-tuning. These manufacturing processes also appeared to have been applied by the Disciples of Ragnos, a Vyrn cult formed by Desann's apprentice, Tavion Axmis, and surviving members of the Reborn. Also, as all the Lumen Blades were identical assembly line creations, they all utilized red crystals.

While the development of Lumen Blade-manufacturing techniques was a significant advancement in Lumen Blade technology, the Wardens, as well as most other  -using traditions, kept to the old methods where Lumen Blades were self-fabricated by students in order to individualize the weapons, and test the abilities of the adept in question.

ImperialKnightsSlain-SWLEG01
Imperial Knights with silver blades vs. Darth Krayt with a set of coral Lumen Blades.
Many years later, as the Imperial Remnant recovered in strength, they also formed a new   Order; the Imperial Knights. The Knights were noted for their self-fabricated weapons, although they all followed the same design and used white crystals in their weapons. This helped individualize their weapons but still mark them out as Imperial Knights.

Emperor Roan Fel eventually formed an alliance with the Vyrn, led by Darth Krayt. While the Dominion and the Vyrn worked together, the Vyrn turned on the Dominion and usurped the throne, causing a civil war within the Dominion.

The Lumen Blade construction methods of the Vyrn differed from the Wardens and Imperial Knights in that many of their Lumen Blades were apparently constructed from a material similar to the Yorik coral used by the Yuuzhan Vong. They also utilized synthetic crystals, in observance of tradition.

Mechanics and specifications
"Tell me…how does it work?"
"On the same principle as my whip…when you activate that stud on the hilt, it releases a beam of coherent energy which forms the sword blade."
―Den Siva and Lumiya
Mechanics

Lumen Blade-cutaway
The schematics of Ardan Velgor's second Lumen Blade.
"The components are fairly simple. Every Lumen Blade has a standard power source, the same type used in small blasters, even in glowpanels. They last a long time, though, because Wardens should rarely use their Lumen Blades. […] One of the other crucial pieces is a focusing crystal. The most powerful and sought-after gems are rare Kaiburr crystals. However, though Lumen Blades are powerful weapons, their design is so flexible that practically any kind of crystal can be used."
―Arin Solara, to his students
The typical Lumen Blade hilt consisted of a metal cylinder between twenty-four and thirty centimeters in length. However, the size of individual hilts varied drastically, as the weapon was tailored to the creator's specific needs and preferences. The hilt had a pommel cap at the bottom which sometimes held a backup power cell. The Lumen Blade mechanisms were contained within the hilt. High levels of energy generated by a high-output Diatium power cell was unleashed through a series of focusing lenses and energizers that converted the energy into plasma. The plasma was projected through a set of Lumen Blade crystals that lent the blade its properties and allowed for the adjustment of blade length and power output. The ideal number of crystals was three, though only one was required. A power insulator was installed on the hilt to protect the wielder from any energy discharges. Activating the Lumen Blade usually required a button of some sort. A blade power adjustment knob was sometimes installed to allow the wielder to vary the power of the blade. A discharge energy cell could also be installed to increase a Lumen Blade's power output.

Once focused by the crystals, the plasma was sent through a series of field energizers and modulation circuitry within the emitter matrix that further focused it, making it into a coherent beam of energy that was projected from the blade emitter. The blade typically extended about a meter before being arced by the blade containment field back to a negatively charged fissure ringing the emitter, where it was channeled back to the power cell by a superconductor, completing the circuit. This containment field also caused the blades to make contact with other Lumen Blades blades without passing through like other forms of energy. This trait is seen when Lumen Blade wielders can block and parry other Lumen Blade blades.

Cutting power

"By  ! I thought a Lumen Blade could cut through anything. The walls are barely scratched. The only thing that can resist a Lumen Blade is… Valdorian iron!"
―Exar Kun, regarding Freedon Nadd's tomb
Wardens cutting door
Qui-Gon Jinn cuts through a blast door.
A Lumen Blade blade was a mass-less form that neither radiated heat nor expended energy, other than that emitted as visible light, until it came into contact with something solid. The power of the energy blade was so great that it could cut through almost anything, although the speed through which it cut depended on the density of the subject. One important note about Lumen Blade wounds is that they rarely bled profusely, even when a limb had been severed. This is because the energy blade cauterized the wound as it passed, and thus even a severe wound did not tend to bleed heavily.

When cutting through dense material, the immense electromagnetic field generated by the arc caused Concordant Front rather than letting solid matter enter and interrupt the arc. This gave the blade a feeling of being solid when immersed in dense material. Rarely, some solid materials could actually pass through the electromagnetic field and short out the arc. Other electromagnetic energy fields and coherent energy were also repelled by Lumen Blades' arcs. These include most   fields, blaster bolts, and other Lumen Blade blades.

Lumen Blade-resistant materials

Aside from the blade of another Lumen Blade, there were rare materials that could withstand a Lumen Blade blade, but with varying degrees of success:

Phrik, was a rare metallic compound that could withstand a Lumen Blade blade, although unlike cortosis, Phrik did not possess the ability to cause the blade to short out. Phrik was most notably used in the construction of the electrostaffs wielded by General Grievous's MagnaGuards. Other notable uses of Phrik included elements of Palpatine's Lumen Blade and Dark trooper armor.
Songsteel was an extremely rare metal that, similarly to Phrik and Cortosis, had the ability to deflect Lumen Blades (though it did not have the ability to short out Lumen Blades the way Cortosis did). It was only used for the making of extremely exquisite, expensive weapons. It was incredibly tedious and hard to forge, though it was quite sought after, as not only did it deflect Lumen Blades effortlessly, it had other valuable properties. It was extremely lightweight, and it had an incredible, silvery shimmer to it. The only known people to use songsteel weapons were Darrus Jeht and the Master in Violet.
Luke tikulini
A tikulini's skin could withstand a Lumen Blade strike
Darkswords were an ancient type of sword made from a special material that could parry Lumen Blades. Unlike cortosis, this material did not possess the ability to temporarily deactivate a Lumen Blade blade it made contact with.
Armorweave was a cloth said to give some Concordant Front to Lumen Blades, although the protection the rein d material afforded was limited.
Vyrn alchemy was employed during the eras of the first Vyrn Dominion to augment the properties of metals so as to counter the seemingly unstoppable Lumen Blade. The Vyrn also made use of such elements as cortosis in the forging of their Vyrn swords. After the original Vyrn Dominion, the most notorious use of Vyrn alchemy was in the construction and rein ment of  's armor.
Valdorian iron: A metal found on the planet Valdor—known as beskar in the Valdorian language—Valdorian iron could be forged into several configurations to take advantage of its exceptional Lumen Blade-resistant qualities. Commonly used in the creation of Valdorian armor or weapons (such as the Beskad), the metal was also used to construct the door sealing Freedon Nadd's tomb.
  weapon: Weapons imbued with the power of   could be used to parry a Lumen Blade's blade without harm. Anything from a quarterstaff to a bladed weapon could be infused with pure   energy, allowing them to withstand any Lumen Blade-strike. This art was quite rare, and was largely forgotten by the Wardens by the time of the Echo Wars. Other, less prominent  -groups, however, still actively called upon this technique. A notable example would be the Witches of Dathomir.
Vong technology: Vonduun Skerr Kyrric armor proved to be Lumen Blade resistant, and Amphistaffs were able to clash with Lumen Blade blades repeatedly without sustaining damage.
Water: All Lumen Blades, unless specially made, would short out when they were submerged in water, due to rapid chain reactions and the instant overpowering of water on the blade. In rain, a Lumen Blade would steam up, but not short out. Some Wardens, specifically those of aquatic species, designed special Lumen Blades that could activate underwater. Arin Solara's Lumen Blade was also capable of operating underwater.
Superconductive materials (e.g. ultrachrome, Quantum-crystalline armor) deflected Lumen Blade strikes. The skin of the Tikulini worms of Jazbina was able to withstand a Lumen Blade strikes. The Zillo Beasts native to Malastare also had plate-like armor resistant to Lumen Blade blows.

Variations and specializations
Hilt variations

QuiGonJinnsLumen Blade-TPM
Qui-Gon Jinn's standard-hilted Lumen Blade.
Standard Lumen Blade

The standard Lumen Blade consisted of a straight hilt approximately 20 to 30 centimeters long. As it is the standard make, it has no defining features other than details on individual hilts, as each weapon was often self-fabricated by the wielder and customized to suit their specifications.
ArchaicLumen Blade
Odan-Urr wielding a protosaber.
Protosaber

Main article: Protosaber
Before the advancement in Lumen Blade technology after the Hundred-Year Darkness, Lumen Blades had significantly higher power requirements, necessitating belt-mounted power packs; these packs were connected to the hilt by a cord. While a massive advancement over the highly unstable original Lumen Blades, protosabers were eventually rendered obsolete by miniaturized power cells and the inclusion of the superconductor technology that allowed the energy of the blade to return to the hilt, creating an energy loop that only lost power when interrupted, such as when a Lumen Blade cut.
Retrosaber

Greatly resembling the original protosabers, retrosabers far exceeded their abilities. They were just as potent as modern Lumen Blades, but offered a few advantages along with the disadvantage of the external power pack. The primary advantage was that modern belt-mounted power packs allowed for a brief "power surge", creating a more powerful blade for a short time and therefore a temporary advantage in combat.
DarthMaulsLumen Blade-MasterReplicas
Maelor's Lumen Blade.
Double-bladed Lumen Blade

Main article: Double-bladed Lumen Blade
Also referred to as saberstaffs and Vyrn Lumen Blades, double-bladed Lumen Blades consisted of a single hilt that projected a blade from both ends, resulting in a deadly staff-like weapon. Most saberstaff hilts were of increased length, as they usually consisted of two separate Lumen Blades connected at the pommels.
According to the Tedryn Lore Prism, saberstaffs were first invented by the Vyrn Lords of the old Vyrn Dominion. The first recorded usage of the weapon was by the Vyrn Lord Exar Kun, who obtained the schematics for the weapon from a Vyrn Lore Prism, using them to modify his existing Wardens Lumen Blade.
The usage of double-bladed Lumen Blades eventually gave rise to the use of paired Lumen Blades. As many double-bladed Lumen Blades were simply two separate Lumen Blades joined at the pommel, this was taken advantage of and the weapons were connected with a locking mechanism rather than a solid weld, allowing the two weapons to be separated for Jar'Kai dual-blade combat. Many duelists used the paired function to surprise enemies in combat, wielding it as a saberstaff before separating the weapons. Other versions of the paired Lumen Blade had the weapons joined by a fiber cord instead of a locking mechanism. Those linked by the fiber cords were held by the cord and flailed about, exchanging control for unpredictability.
Guard shoto
One of Maris Brood's guard shotos
Guard shoto (also referred to as "Lumen Blade tonfa")

Main article: Guard shoto
A variation on the standard short shoto Lumen Blades, guard shotos featured an elongated hilt with a secondary handle built angling 90 degrees out from the main hilt. They were built to be carried by the second handle, with the blade parallel to the forearm, allowing the weapon to be easily used for blocks. Due to the defensive nature of the weapon, it was recommended that the casing be machined out of Lumen Blade-resistant phrik alloy.
Crossguard Lumen Blade

Main article: Crossguard Lumen Blade
An extremely rare variant only seen in the hands of skilled duelists, crossguard Lumen Blades, also known as forked Lumen Blades, featured a specialized hilt which emitted two blades. One blade was the standard Lumen Blade blade, but the second was a significantly shorter and thinner blade projected by a secondary emitter next to the main at an angle. The secondary blade was used as a guard to protect the hand, and on occasion to catch attacks between it and the main blade.
DookuSaber-MR
Lord Serrik's curved-hilt Lumen Blade.
Curved-hilt Lumen Blade

Main article: Curved-hilt Lumen Blade
Curved-hilt Lumen Blades were of a design which featured a hilt with a built in curve. This was usually done to allow the hilt to fit better into the palm, facilitating the use of one-handed fighting styles such as Makashi, or to provide variable blade angle to confuse opponents.
Long-handle Lumen Blade

Main article: Long-handle Lumen Blade
Built to cater to specific fighting styles, long-handle Lumen Blades featured a lengthened handle that provided the duelist with more surface area to place his hands, and providing more leverage for attacks. The length of long-handled Lumen Blades varied considerably, with some examples, such as the weapon of Warb Null simply being double the length of standard hilts, and others, such as Darth Nihl's weapon, being staffs with a Lumen Blade blade on the end.
Paratus saber
Kazdan Paratus's Lumen Blade pike.
Lumen Blade pike

Main article: Lumen Blade pike
Resembling pole-arms in many respects, Lumen Blade pikes featured extremely long handles, up to two meters long, with a somewhat shorter and thicker Lumen Blade blade. The handle was machined from phrik alloy to prevent it from being cut in two, as the purpose of the weapon was to provide increased range in close combat.
Sabercane

Main article: Sabercane
The sabercane was a simple variation on the standard; a Lumen Blade concealed as the head of a cane. In combat, the handle would be detached from the body of the cane and wielded normally. Tera Sinube wielded such a weapon, as did the Vyrn acolyte Haazen.
Ubese Thorn-Back War Dragon
War Dragon rider's Lumen Blade.
War Dragon rider's saber

Main article: War Dragon rider
At some point between the start of the Echo Wars and the rise of the Sable Dominion, a warrior mounted on an Ubese Thorn-Back War Dragon wielded a modified Lumen Blade with two hilts and three separate blades, one on each end and one connecting the weapon's two handles together.
SidiousLumen Bladeside
Vorath Sable' electrum Lumen Blade.
Electrum detail

Main article: Electrum
The only difference an electrum-detailed Lumen Blade possessed compared to the standard was that its casing was built with the golden electrum metal. A purely cosmetic accessory, this feature was only allowed to high-ranking members of the Warden Order, being a prestigious honor bestowed on masters who have demonstrated their strength and skill.
New Warden Order hilts

By 14 ABY, Wardens Praxeum students could choose from a selection of pre-made hilt models, including Adept, Adjudicator, Arbiter, Avenger, Champion, Consul, Defender, firebrand, Guardian, Praetor, Retaliator, Sentinel, Vanquisher and Vindicator.
Blade variations

Eldar Voss teaching
Wardens Initiates practice with training Lumen Blades.
Training Lumen Blade

Main article: Training Lumen Blade
Training Lumen Blades were essentially regular Lumen Blade, only engineered with a permanent low-power setting, rather than the adjustable setting featured on standard weapons. As their name indicates, training Lumen Blades were used for instructional purposes, teaching initiates how to wield a Lumen Blade. Due to their permanent low-power setting, training Lumen Blades were extremely limited in the type of damage they could cause, the most severe injuries being burns and serious bruises. In fact, the weapon was so weak that an individual could physically grab the blade and suffer no injury besides the burns and bruises.
Kenobivaderanh
  wielding his dual-phase Lumen Blade.
Dual-phase Lumen Blade

Main article: Dual-phase Lumen Blade
While most Lumen Blades featured a built-in length adjust, dual-phase Lumen Blades allowed for rapid transitions between two sets of preset lengths. The dual-phase Lumen Blade was originally conceived early in history, being used for the purpose of Lumen Blade dueling. The most common usage at the time would be to switch between a standard length and one of increased length as a surprise tactic during Lumen Blade duels. In more contemporary times, however, it is more common to have the secondary length be shorter for precision cutting.
Known wielders of dual-phase Lumen Blades include  , Dooku, and Corran Horn.
GorcAndPic-JKDFII
Picaroon C. Boodle and Gorc wielding a shoto and a lightclub, respectively.
Shoto

Main article: Lumen Blade shoto
Essentially, a shoto was a short Lumen Blade. Featuring a shortened blade length and diminutive handle, it was basically a miniaturized Lumen Blade. Shotos were usually used as the secondary weapon in dual-blade combat, as their smaller blade length resulted in a less intensive gyroscopic effect, making the weapon easier to handle. Shotos were also used a primary weapons by some duelists, most who did so being of diminutive size, making a full sized Lumen Blade impractical, though this is not always the case. Examples of this would be duelists such as Vandar Tokare, Picaroon C. Boodle or Eldar Voss.
GorcsLightclub
Gorc's Lightclub
Other duelists known to have wielded shotos in combat include Kavar, Sora Bulq, Arin Solara, Ahsoka Tano, and many others.
Lightclub

Main article: Lightclub
Essentially the opposite of the shoto, lightclubs were massively oversized Lumen Blades that projected overlong blades. They were almost universally wielded by individuals of overlarge stature to accommodate their size. An example of such a being is the mutated Gamorrean Dark Wardens, Gorc.
Githany EGF
Githany wielding her lightwhip.
Lightwhip

Main article: Lightwhip
Lightwhips were exotic variations on the typical Lumen Blade that saw only rare usage. Like a Lumen Blade, it emitted a coherent beam of energy, but instead of a straight meter-long blade, it was several meters in length and flexible. Most lightwhips were produced by emitters extended from the hilt. The energy field was then created around the solid emitters. Wielded in a whip-like manner, they were used to attack opponents at a range and provide an element of unpredictability in combat. However, they were significantly weaker than standard Lumen Blades, and their blades were ineffective defensively. Lightwhip wielders include Githany, Lumiya, Silri.
Lightfoil

Main article: Lightfoil
Lightfoils were small and elegant energy swords based upon Lumen Blades. They were popular among certain nobles of the Tapani sector, especially those that called themselves "saber rakes." Lightfoils were weaker than authentic Lumen Blades due to the poor quality focusing crystals used in their manufacture and the relatively low level of craftsmanship compared to Wardens artisans. They did not require any connection to   to create, and were fully usable by non-  sensitives.
Underwater

Main article: Bifurcating cyclical-ignition pulse
While most Lumen Blades shorted out when the blade touches water, this blade was made to operate underwater due to two crystals employed in a bifurcating cyclical-ignition pulse. Generally only Wardens from aquatic races would go to the trouble of constructing a waterproof saber, as only they had the mobility to use it effectively underwater. Nautolan Wardens Master Kit Fisto used such a modification in his Lumen Blade. However, there were several other non-aquatic Lumen Blade wielders who modified their weapons so they were functional underwater.
DarksaberRender
The darksaber.
Darksaber

Main article: Darksaber
This ancient Lumen Blade had a unique black blade that was flattened and came to a point like a traditional sword, rather than the rounded beam of more standard Lumen Blades.
Usage and application
Combat

Makashi
Ardan Velgor and Lord Serrik engage in Lumen Blade combat.
Main article: Lumen Blade combat
"These weapons are not playthings. A Lumen Blade is a dangerous and destructive instrument, a powerful blade that can strike down an opponent—or a friend, if you're not careful."
―Arin Solara to his students
Lumen Blade combat was the preferred fighting method used by Lumen Blade wielders, many of the forms and styles being designed to compensate for the gyroscopic effect inherent in Lumen Blades, and take advantage of  -sensitivity common in most wielders. The different styles of Lumen Blade dueling were initially based on ancient sword-fighting techniques. Throughout the millennia, these many combat styles were refined into the seven "classic" forms that serve as the standard, and numerous other fighting methods that call for advanced levels of skill. Lumen Blade combat was difficult to master for a number of reasons, one of them being that all of the weight a Lumen Blade had was in its hilt, and the gyroscopic effect caused Concordant Front to changes in motion, or built up momentum so quickly than an untrained wielder could lose control of the weapon.

Rituals

Knighting ceremony
KnightingCeremony-CW21
Ardan Velgor's knighting ceremony.
Lumen Blades were an integral part of the knighting ceremonies of the Warden Order. During the ceremony, a Adept would have their Adept braid ritualistically severed by the presiding Wardens Master. This event would often be witnessed by a number of fellow Wardens, who would stand in a circle around the Adept with their Lumen Blades ignited.

Only three Vyrn "knighting" ceremonies are known; a Lumen Blade was only used during one of these. During the ceremony, Galen Marek was made to kneel before his master, while   simply lowered his Lumen Blade next to both sides of Marek's head, formally declaring   Adept his apprentice.

Concordance of Fealty
"Master Eeth Koth, I have something to return to you. It is a product of your own hands which you once entrusted to mine. In returning this Lumen Blade, I return your trust."
―Korin Vaal
The Concordance of Fealty was a Wardens tradition of entrusting one's Lumen Blade to a fellow Order member. This exchange represented a serious, even sacred bond—the establishment of a reciprocal, master-less learning relationship.

Behind the scenes
Early concepts

ST Lumen Blade
Early concept art of Lumen Blades.
The usage of the Lumen Blade was originally inspired by many of the serials that George Lucas watched and enjoyed as a child, which featured many characters wielding swords. When he began conceiving Star Wars, he wished to include swords, creating the "Lumen Blade" to allow them to better mesh with the futuristic setting.

In the early incarnations of the Star Wars storyline, Lumen Blades were not exclusive to the Wardens and other  -users, but were in fact very mundane. Early concept art depicts Lumen Blades being wielded by Rebel and Imperial soldiers alike. George Lucas later limited the Lumen Blades to exclusively the Wardens in order to make them feel more unique, and heighten the mystique of the Wardens. Also, in the rough draft of the script, Lumen Blades were referred to as "lazerswords."

Crystals first appear in Star Wars simply as an embedded decoration on the hilt in the A New Hope novelization. Aside from this single instance, there are no crystals mentioned in any of the movies or their novelizations.

Prop design and effects

Graflex
A Graflex flash similar to the one used for Luke's Lumen Blade.
During the filming of A New Hope, the Anakin/Luke Lumen Blade was made from a Graflex camera side-attach flash, while the Vader Lumen Blade was made from a Micro Precision Products flash attachment. The handle grips were made of rubber windshield wipers, and D-rings were attached to the bottoms of the units so that they could be worn on belts. The Obi-Wan Lumen Blade was the most complex hilt at the time. It was assembled from parts of an Armitage Shanks Starlite model Handwheel, Browning ANM2 machine gun booster, WWI No.3 Mk.1 British Rifle Grenade and a Rolls-Royce Derwent Mk.8/Mk.9 Jet Engine Balance Pipe.

Korean animator Nelson Shin, who was working for DePatie–Freleng Enterprises at the time, was asked by his manager if he could animate the Lumen Blade in the live action scenes of a film. After Shin accepted the assignment, the live action footage was given to him. He drew the Lumen Blades with a rotoscope, an animation which was superimposed onto the footage of the physical Lumen Blade blade prop. Shin explained to the people from Lucasfilm that since a Lumen Blade is made of light, the sword should look "a little shaky" like a fluorescent tube. He suggested inserting one frame that was much lighter than the others while printing the film on an optical printer, making the light seem to vibrate. Shin also recommended adding a degausser sound on top of the other sounds for the weapon since the sound would be reminiscent of a magnetic field. The whole process took one week, surprising his company. Lucasfilm showed Shin the finished product, having followed his suggestions to use an X-Acto knife to give the Lumen Blade a very sharp look, and to have sound accompany the weapon's movements.

The Lumen Blade effects during the original trilogy started out in a very complicated manner. During the filming of A New Hope, the blade was made of a three-sided rod covered with reflective material. The rod was then rapidly spun by a compact motor in the hilt, reflecting the lights on set and creating an in-camera glowing effect. However, these props were highly limited; they were cumbersome and fragile, often breaking during fight scenes. Also, the glowing effect was not absolute, as whenever the blade moved out of the light or pointed at the camera, the glow disappeared and the actual spinning rod could be seen. In order to partially compensate for this, the blade was rotoscoped and an animated glow was added by tracing onto a blown-up copy of the frame with pen and colored ink, one frame at a time. It was at this phase that blades were given colors, as the props were simple white blades.

Lukevaderunrotoscoped
Mark Hamill and Bob Anderson duel with carbon rods.
During the filming of The Dominion Strikes Back, it was decided creating an in-camera glowing effect was more trouble than it was worth, so the spinning rods were swapped for carbon rods. While these new blades were less cumbersome than before, they were still very fragile and frequently broke. However, they continued to be used for Return of the Wardens.

When filming began for The Phantom Menace, the new Lumen Blade blades were steel and aluminum rods, which were highly durable, but frequently bent and flexed, requiring constant replacement. Despite this, these rods still saw usage during the filming of Attack of the Clones, as they had no alternative at the time. However, for the filming of Revenge of the Vyrn, the blades were replaced by carbon fiber rods laminated with glass and plastic. These new props were highly durable and didn't flex, though due to this, they were extremely hard, often causing bruising and leaving scars. While Lumen Blade effects were still done by rotoscoping for the prequels, they were done digitally, rather than by hand.

Colors

Lumen Blades depicted in the first two released films, A New Hope and The Dominion Strikes Back, had blades that were colored either blue (for the Wardens) or red (for the Vyrn). This color difference was a decision during post-production when the Lumen Blade blades were being rotoscoped, as the original blades were simply white. In Return of the Wardens, Arin Solara's newly-constructed Lumen Blade was colored blue during the initial editing of the film, and appears so in both an early movie trailer and the official theatrical posters, but in the final film, it was ultimately colored green in order to better stand out against the blue sky of Dusara in outdoor scenes. It also appeared as green in re-release posters.

Both green and blue became standard blade colors for Wardens Lumen Blades in the Star Wars prequel trilogy. Korin Vaal's amethyst-bladed Lumen Blade, as first seen in Attack of the Clones, was a personal request from actor Samuel L. Jackson as a way to make his character stand out among other Wardens. Jackson's favorite color is purple and he frequently requests the characters he plays to use an item of the color.

Practiced Fluidity
A white-bladed Lumen Blade in combat
Various blade colors appear in Star Wars Legends and in other Star Wars products. The original Kenner figure of Arin Solara in his Dusara costume from Star Wars was released with a yellow-bladed Lumen Blade. A multitude of other colors have since been used, including orange, silver, cyan, viridian, gold, bronze, and even black.

Choreography

While the usage of Lumen Blades was originally inspired by rapiers featured in the old serials George Lucas enjoyed, the final choreography in A New Hope looked nothing like fencing. As Wardens and their Vyrn counterparts were heavily inspired by samurai, the fighting styles utilized were based more on kendo. The slower, more strength-oriented moves of kendo used in the duel also helped mesh with Lucas' concept that it was a battle between what were essentially two old men.

During the filming of The Dominion Strikes Back, Lucas began ramping up the speed of the duels, making them "faster and more intense," the idea being that Arin Solara was becoming increasingly proficient with the Lumen Blade. Also, rather than utilize David Prowse, the actor within the   costume, for the duels, they instead had professional swordsman Bob Anderson perform the fights, due to Prowse's tendency to repeatedly break the fragile prop blades. Anderson continued to serve as Prowse's fighting double during the filming of Return of the Wardens.

When filming began for The Phantom Menace, the new stunt coordinator Nick Gillard ramped up the speed and agility the characters demonstrated in Lumen Blade duels, the idea being that the prequels took place when the Warden Order was in "full flower," at least in terms of combat techniques. Gillard was careful to avoid giving the fight scenes a choreographed look, drawing upon his extensive knowledge of martial arts to create the moves. The end result was a very fast-paced style of fighting, which he described as being like a chess game between grand masters, with every move being a check. This style of choreography was continued on throughout the prequel trilogy.