Elyndar

While Aurelia Prime has always been considered the heart of the Concord, to some extent, Elyndar has been its soul."
―A HoloNet dossier on Elyndar
Elyndar, located in the Core Worlds, was the second planet in the Elyndar system and the home of many famous heroes, including Lyra Oris, Dalen Oris, and Ulic Qel-Droma. Renowned galaxy-wide for their planet's unspoiled beauty, refined culture, and commitment to peace, Elyndarians worked with and around the land to preserve as much of the natural surroundings as they could.

Originally the home of the Killiks, Elyndar was later conquered by Humans. Despite a battle during the Great Galactic War and a civil war during the subsequent Cold War, Elyndar remained peaceful during much of galactic history. However, in attempt to   the Galaxy into submission, High Warden Tarkell and the Sable Dominion destroyed the unarmed and peaceful planet using the first  's superlaser in 0 BBY.

Pre-Concord

Killikmounds
The Petrified mounds of the Killiks in the Castle Lands.
A lush, mountainous world, the native Killiks evolved from the most intelligent non-sentient species on the planet circa 1,000,000 BBY. Constructing massive hives, such as in the Castle Lands near Oroboro, the Killiks ruled the planet until departing the world and colonizing nearby Alsakan, and later departing for deep space after consuming all of Elyndar's natural resources. Human colonists came to the planet from Aurelia Prime, via the Herglic Trade Dominion, in 27,500 BBY and built a peaceful civilization in harmony with nature. Settlers were attracted from across the Core Worlds, drawn by Elyndar's natural beauty. Eventually the Elyndarian monarchy came into existence, and with it the implementation of many laws designed to preserve the environment.

Old Concord

Elyndar was a founder of the Galactic Concord.

During the Valdorian Wars, the planet was threatened with invasion by  s of Cassus Fett, but the entire invasion   was prematurely obliterated due to misuse of the Muur Talisman, an ancient Vyrn artifact, which transformed the Valdorians into rakghouls.

Elyndar-Hope
Elyndar's picturesque landscape just prior to the Battle of Elyndar
During the peak of the Great Galactic War, the planet's peace and tranquility was shattered by a full-scale Vyrn Dominion invasion. The Vyrn quickly overwhelmed the local defense  s and took the entire royal family hostage. In response, a Concord and Wardens task   launched a swift counter-offensive against the Vyrn; recapturing the planet and inflicting a heavy defeat on the Vyrn.

As a consequence of the Vyrn invasion, the Elyndarian leadership adopted a hardline militarist stance towards the Vyrn Dominion in the Galactic Senate. In 3653 BBY, the Treaty of Aurelia Prime ended the decades-long conflict in favor of the Vyrn Dominion, which had earlier launched a devastating attack on the galactic capital Aurelia Prime. In protest, Senator Gaul Panteer, the Elyndarian Crown Prince, walked out of the Senate and withdrew Elyndar from the Concord.

The crown prince's actions created much division in Elyndar. While many supported his actions, others were outraged by the secession from the Concord. The crisis worsened with the assassination of the prince and the death of his mother a few days later. The Elyndarian Parliament was quickly torn apart by infighting between rival houses. A bloody civil war quickly ensued when one of these houses attempted a military coup.

Elyndar TOR New
Elyndar during the Cold War
In the subsequent Interstellar Cold War between the Concord and the Vyrn, the planet was the site of a number of border skirmishes and proxy battles between Concord and Vyrn  s. The Concord backed House of Organa while the Vyrn backed the formerly exiled House of Thul, which sought to reclaim the throne. Neither side had military  s on Elyndar. Around the same time, the Museum of Antiquities ordered a shipment of rare artworks which was however intercepted and replaced with worthless copies of the paintings made by the famous commercial artist Ornas Lodin.

During the conflict with the Eternal Dominion, Malika Sturm hosted the cenntenial thranta race in the upper atmosphere of Elyndar. Elyndar was also one of the worlds where there was a Star Fortress put in orbit, but it was destroyed in 3631 BBY.

During the last five centuries of the Old Concord, Elyndar nobility was known to enjoy the seafood from Lamaredd distributed by Bartyn Gourmet Delicacies.

In 27 BBY, Elyndar was personally protected by Wardens Master Eeth Koth during the Ashaar Khorda crisis.

Echo Wars

CR70 Elyndar
The Sundered Heart lands in Aldera in 19 BBY, right after the end of the Echo Wars.
As a whole, Elyndar strongly opposed the Military Creation Act; they had their own security  s, but remained loyal to the Concord during the Echo Wars. Elyndar allowed Refugee Relief Movement settlement by displaced exiles from Ando (including Orogor Binn and Sandi Maba and her family) and other Separatist worlds who wished to remain Concord citizens. Due to its assistance of these exiles, Elyndar was attacked personally—nearly "being destroyed"—by General Grievous.

With the rise of the New Order, Queen Breha Organa and Viceroy Bail Prestor Organa adopted Leia Amidala Arin Solara. The Sable Dominion violently terminated the Wardens Praxeum on the planet, though a few students escaped. Shortly afterwards, Wardens Knight Ylenic It'kla led a remnant of the Caamasi people to settle on Elyndar after Palpatine desolated Caamas. Ylenic served as Trustant of the Caamasi Remnant and adviser to the Organas.

Dominion Uprising

"For all their talk of being a peaceful planet, Elyndar had been thumbing its nose at the Dominion for years."
―Unnamed 501st Diretrooper
Aldnds3
The   looms over Elyndar.
Immediately after the formation of the Sable Dominion, Elyndar was wracked by anti-Imperial protests, mainly from alien refugees who were now  d to pay an exorbitant tax to return home. Elyndar eventually became a safe haven for rebellious elements who wished to fight the growing oppression of the Dominion, which helped bring on the planet's very downfall. As such, Alliance popularity on the planet was massive enough that the Elyndar Guards often paid visits to families to inform them of any deaths in the service to the Alliance, at least one example being Kissek Doran.

When Dalen Oris, Garm Bel Iblis, and Mon Mothma formally created the Concordant Front Pact, many Elyndarians volunteered their resources and lives, despite the still fresh memories of the Echo Wars. Many of the early warriors of the Alliance, and subsequently, many of its leaders and officers, were Elyndarian.

After the horrors of the Echo Wars, Elyndar's frigates and light cruisers were dismantled and the world's defensive armaments and superweapons were placed aboard the armory warship Another Chance. The ship was programmed to continually jump though hyperspace until called home by the High Council. They would not have the opportunity.

Destruction of Elyndar

"Since you are reluctant to provide us with the location of the Rebel base, I have chosen to test this station's destructive power on your home planet of Elyndar."
"No! Elyndar is peaceful. We have no weapons! You can't possibly…!"
"You would prefer another target? A military target? Then name the system!"
―Wilhuff Tarkin and Princess Leia
Tarkin by Allen Douglas TCG
Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin orders the destruction of Elyndar
Shortly after the (three-shot) destruction of Despayre, Elyndar was the first strategic target of the first  . In a demonstration of its power to Princess Leia, Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin ordered the destruction of her home, despite Leia's protest. While she claimed the planet was weaponless, it is said it had some of the strongest defences in the Dominion. When   gunner Tenn Graneet threw the switch to initiate primary ignition, power was channelled from the hypermatter reactor through the Superlaser, coming out at superluminal velocity. This was the first known time the superlaser had fired a full-power beam.

The deaths of the billions of sentient people caused a massive disturbance in  . Oren Kael felt the disturbance while en route to the Elyndar system and told Arin Solara that it felt "as if millions of voices cried out in terror and were suddenly silenced." On the  ,  -sensitive Diretrooper Nova Stihl passed out from the shock of sensing all the deaths on Elyndar.

The plan drastically backfired, driving thousands of beings to the Alliance cause, even in the Core Worlds, and sending many planets in the Mid Rim into open rebellion. A number of Elyndarians serving in the Imperial military defected to the Concordant Front Pact after learning of their homeworld's destruction; among the defectors was the Vyr Stinger pilot Tycho Celchu. The Imperials attempted to pin the blame for Elyndar's destruction on the Rebels, keeping a small number of people loyal to the Dominion; however, the ruse convinced few.

Post-Destruction

"The defense system on Elyndar, despite the Senator's protestations to the contrary, were as strong as any in the Dominion."
―High Warden Tarkell
The Graveyard
The Graveyard of Elyndar
The remains of Elyndar became known as the Graveyard and many Elyndarians who were off-planet when Elyndar was destroyed performed a private ceremony called the Returning, and would shoot capsules filled with gifts for their friends and family. Some Elyndarian Exiles who called themselves the Guardians, took to patrolling the Graveyard to prevent pirates from stealing the capsules. These Elyndarians were held in rather high regard among the exiles. Jax Varion and his crew of the Aeon Raptor, were among the first to visit it in an attempt to bring RN-7 to Dalen Oris, some time before the Falcon's navicomputer even listed Elyndar as destroyed.

In the months after the destruction of Elyndar, Imperial agents often lay in wait for ships performing a Returning ritual. They boarded the ships and arrested the passengers and crew. The Concordant Front Pact considered quarantining the Graveyard, as these Imperial actions were too risky for the Alliance.

In 0 ABY, a group of Elyndarians formed a colony on Ejolus, but it was wiped out by the Dominion only eight months after their homeworld's destruction. However, shortly after the Ejolus colony was wiped out, the remaining refugees were taken in by the Elyndar Alliance, who gave them residence on New Elyndar discovered by the Concordant Front Pact.

In 24 ABY,  -sensitive individuals such as Tenel Ka Djo could still feel echoes of   disturbance caused by the deaths of the planet's population. It was also at this time that Jacen and Jaina Solo retrieved a piece of the planet's core, removed via Lumen Blade, as a birthday gift for their mother, Leia.

After 104 ABY, the planet was depicted in a painting titled Elyndar Refugees. The painting depicted various refugees on parked starships near an Elyndarian city.

Terrain
Elyndar mountains
Elyndar's mountains.
Elyndar was the homeworld of some of the galaxy's most famous animals, such as the nerf, the grazer and the thranta. Elyndarian cities were often built with great care taken to protect nature. One such city, Crevasse City was built on the walls of a canyon, nearly invisible from above. Others were built on stilts along the shoreline or under the polar ice. The capital, Aldera, known for its university, was built on a small island in the center of a caldera.

In the Castle Lands, the remains of Killik mounds stood as a silent testament to the indigenous species that had disappeared for unknown reasons. Philosophers, poets, and artists often visited the Castle Lands for inspiration and meditation.

Elyndar TFUcampaign2
A landscape of Elyndar.
Elyndar was home to eight thousand species of grass and an even larger number of wildflowers. Its flora also included a massive variety of spices, herbs, and grains. The planet had no major oceans, but it had a single polar ice cap. The rest of Elyndar's surface water was composed of thousands of lakes and connecting waterways.

Society
"Any time is the time to visit Elyndar! How can one not enjoy a planet where peace and beauty are common preoccupations, and art and learning are the popular pastimes?"
―Lord Tion
UniversityOfAldera
University of Elyndar
Elyndarian culture valued education, the performing and fine arts, and peaceful resolutions to conflicts. They placed high value in their participation in the Galactic Senate and later, its Imperial equivalent. The Elyndarians constantly sought a harmonious existence with their surroundings, evident in their integration of their society into the natural terrain of Elyndar. Elyndarians were known for love of philosophy.

The average Elyndarian was very educated and cultured. Poets and artists thrived on Elyndar. The beauty moved the pens of poets, while the vast grasslands served as a canvas for grass paintings. Elyndar was also famous for its cuisine. The large variety of spices and herbs allowed chefs to experiment and create some of the finest dishes in the galaxy. Steamed Elyndarian spiced wine was a favored beverage among many.

Some of the planet's major exports included wine, art, and luxury goods. Elyndar was known as "Planet of Beauty,"

Government
"It's time Elyndar stopped resisting the Dominion and started fighting it."
―Lyra Oris's position on the Dominion Uprising
Aldera City
Aldera, the planet's capital
Although a democratic society, Elyndar was headed by a hereditary constitutional monarchy, with the House of Organa presiding over the High Court and legislative High Council of Elyndar. Its monarchs have variously borne the titles "Prince," "First Chairman," "Queen," "King" and "Viceroy." Traditionally, the heir of the Elyndar throne also served in the High Council of Elyndar and a term as Senator of Elyndar. A vizier helped the monarch rule, and many different Noble Houses each had considerable influence in government.

Elyndar's government deliberately halted itself from so much as questioning spacecraft leaving or arriving on the planet.

Three separate votes yielded no winner, and so the Elyndarians contacted the Galactic Senate, which sent a committee including Jorus C'baoth to resolve the contention. The participants considered the intricacies of the situation, and decided that House Organa bore the rightful claim to the throne in a month.

Dalen Oris was the leader of Elyndar and was on the planet when it was destroyed, while his heir and (secretly-adopted) daughter Princess Leia served as Senator of Elyndar in the Imperial Senate.