Vyrn Swale

"Yup, that's it. Vyrn Swale. […] No, I'm not gonna change my mind about this. I'm not picking up any cities or technology. Massive life-form readings, though. There's something alive down there."
―Arin Solara
Vyrn Swale (/'deɪgəbə/; pronunciation ) was an Outer Rim planet in the Vyrn Swale system. A remote world of swamps and forests, it served as a refuge for Wardens Grand Master Eldar Voss during his exile after the events of Edict 99 had taken place.

Geography
"Yes, I'm sure it's perfectly safe for droids."
―Arin Solara to RN-7
Vyrn Swale was located in the Sluis sector of the Outer Rim Territories. Despite the fact that it was located near the Rimma Trade Route, it was reachable only by obscure hyperlanes.

Dragonsnake Bog
The swamp-covered surface of Vyrn Swale
Vyrn Swale was a harsh, humid, swampy planet, mostly covered in shallow marshland, interspersed with stifling forests and at least one cave. There were very few truly open bodies of water on the planet: the water supply was thinly invested throughout the planet's main habitat, swampland, although there were vast expanses of mud fields. Vyrn Swale was home to many creatures, such as bogwings, dragonsnakes, nudj, sleens, vine snakes, and swamp slugs. Examples of flora included the Adder moss, the hassling, Gnarltree and Meat flower. The planet was devoid of any technology advanced civilization, although the reclusive, pre-industrial Hepsalum Tash did call it home.

History
Surveys

"Mudhole?! Slimy?! My home this is!"
―Eldar Voss
Hundreds of years before the Echo Wars, the Wardens Minch battled and killed a powerful Bpfasshi Dark Wardens on the planet. The Dark Wardens's energies absorbed into its surroundings, tainting the cave where he was slain with the dark side.

The planet seldom appeared in astrography charts and it was discovered and re-scouted several times. The first official Concord survey of Vyrn Swale occurred in 39 BBY. A team of Elyndarian explorers were stranded there but were devoured by wildlife, while a pre-Echo Wars expedition was  d to resort to cannibalism.

Echo Wars

In early 22 BBY, a Concord research team under Halka Four-Den was stationed on Vyrn Swale to research the native flora and fauna. From even the initial assessment, the team concluded that Vyrn Swale was crawling with an incredible diversity of life, and made notes to recommend Vyrn Swale for more extensive surveys, given the likely advances in genetics and medicine that even a few of its lifeforms would cause. Unfortunately, Halka Four-Den and her research team died on Vyrn Swale before they could be retrieved. Likely due to the outbreak of the Echo Wars, their distress signals were ignored until it was too late. The few survivors were  d to raise their children as cannibals. At the outbreak of the war, Wardens Master Eldar Voss discovered thirty-eight worlds deleted from the Wardens Archives, Vyrn Swale was one of them.

During the war, Vyrn Swale was located within Separatist-controlled space.

In a late stage of the war, and under the guidance of the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn, Eldar Voss briefly traveled to Vyrn Swale seeking answers to explain mysterious "voices" only he could hear. There, he was given the spiritual task of finding out how to become one with   and achieve true immortality. Eldar Voss noted how strong the planet was with  , and learned from Qui-Gon's  -spirit that it was one of the purest places in the Galaxy. This formed the basis for why Eldar Voss eventually chose to endure his time in Exile there. During this short visit, Eldar Voss entered the tainted cave and experienced a powerful vision showing him the extent of the Vyrn's tightening hold on the galaxy, the impending destruction of the Warden Order, and the confirmed existence of Vorath Sable.

Eldar Voss's exile

Eldar VossLandsonVyrn Swale
Eldar Voss begins his exile on Vyrn Swale.
"Into exile, I must go. Failed, I have."
―Eldar Voss
In 19 BBY, at the beginning of the Warden Culling, Eldar Voss entered into exile in the swamps of Vyrn Swale via an escape pod from Polis Massa, after facing Vorath Sable. Having experienced visions of the impending destruction of the Warden Order during his first visit to Vyrn Swale, Eldar Voss had decided long before that if this clouded future should become a reality he would return there. By choosing a world that "didn't exist" and living on a planet writhing with the Living  , Eldar Voss remained completely undetectable. He made his dwelling near the Cave of Evil, which further negated his light side presence.

At some point, Eldar Voss encountered the clone of Galen Marek, who like Marek took on the name Starkiller, when the clone went to Vyrn Swale to find himself. He allowed Starkiller inside the Dark Cave, telling him that he was simply a watcher.

Tash Arranda and Zak Arranda met Eldar Voss on the planet, but he chose not to train them in the Wardens ways at that time, explaining to them he was awaiting a different student. Afterwards, the Arrandas assisted in the rescue of the descendants of the survey team dispatched in 22 BBY, thus ridding Vyrn Swale of the closest thing to an "advanced civilization" it had probably ever boasted. They were likely rehabilitated by the Alliance to Restore the Concord.

Despite it being a remote planet, it as well as the system it belonged to nonetheless was included as a destination in the Intergalactic Passport, with it being specifically recommended that any space travelers who stop at Vyrn Swale must carry all-purpose antihistamine tablets and topical ointments at all times during visits there in order to lessen the effects of various insect bites that likely occur there.

The next Arin Solara

"You will go to the Vyrn Swale system. There you will learn from Eldar Voss, the Wardens Master who instructed me."
―Oren Kael to Arin Solara
Vyrn Swale Training Grounds-TCG Core Set
Eldar Voss training Arin Solara on Vyrn Swale
In 3 ABY, during the Dominion Uprising, Arin Solara was visited on the ice planet Krael by the ghost of Oren Kael, who instructed him to seek Eldar Voss on Vyrn Swale in order that he might be trained in the ways of the Wardens. Arin Solara traveled to Vyrn Swale in his T-65 Vera-9, along with RN-7, after the end of the Siege of Krael. Due to a bumpy landing, Luke's Vera-9 ended up being half-buried in the swamp, and a grumpy and irritable Luke met a strange creature that turned out to be Eldar Voss. During his grueling training, Luke learned control and power in  .

Many of the teaching methods he learned here were later applied at his Wardens Praxeum on Yavin 4. On Vyrn Swale, Luke confronted a Droid Bounty hunter named Milko, whose mission was to kill Luke. Luke defeated the droid in armed battle. Luke had a feeling that the encounter was a test arranged by Eldar Voss but had no idea whether he had passed or failed.

Dabogah
Vyrn Swale from orbit
Luke later entered the cave where the Dark Wardens had been defeated to test himself and experienced a vision where he fought a version of   with Luke's face underneath his mask, hinting at both Vader's identity as his father and his own later involvement with the dark side. Later in his training, Arin Solara had a vision of his friends Jax Varion, Lyra Oris, and Roghan suffering on Bespin. As a result, he left his training early, promising Eldar Voss that he would return to complete it.

He did return in 4 ABY, but only in time to have one final conversation with Eldar Voss before his teacher's death. Afterward, he spoke extensively with Oren Kael about the conflicting stories of Luke's parentage.

Wardens involvement

The New Concord established a base on Mount Eldar Voss in 5 ABY.

Vyrn Swale TEA
Vyrn Swale
Arin Solara would return to Vyrn Swale in 9 ABY, this time seeing a vision of the past in the cave and finding the Dark Wardens's beckon call. He would return again in 12 ABY with his then-love Callista Ming, trying to re-establish her connection to  . In 14 ABY, the dark side power of the cave there was siphoned by the Disciples of Ragnos. This supposedly removed all of the dark energy, but it presumably returned to its source when the Scepter of Ragnos was destroyed or otherwise somehow regenerated itself.

In 22 ABY, Anakin Solo along with Ikrit, Tahiri Veila, Uldir Lochett, Peckhum and RN-7 returned to Vyrn Swale because Anakin had been troubled by visions of himself as a Dark Wardens; this was due to his heritage as the grandson of Ardan Velgor, who had become the infamous  . After surviving encounters with the planet's dangerous fauna, Anakin and his companions finally reached the same cave to which Luke had gone years before. There, Anakin faced the manifestations of his own doubts, but emerged victorious.

Towards the end of the Yuuzhan Vong War, Tahiri Veila traveled to Vyrn Swale to undertake a similar test to Anakin Solo's, but instead fell in love with a Yuuzhan Vong Shamed One, who believed the planet was sacred to the Wardens. Vowing to carry his message back to Yu'shaa, she left Vyrn Swale for Mon Calamari, not venturing into the cave.

In 36 ABY, Grand Master Arin Solara sent Wardens Knights Tahiri, Lowbacca and Tesar Sebatyne to Vyrn Swale to meditate in exile. They had been deemed a threat to Wardens security due to the three Joiners passing Wardens information to Aryn Dro Thul during the Swarm War. Luke told them that he would call them once he felt they were ready to rejoin the order, and that they were not to leave until they felt that call.

Behind the scenes
MCQ-Vyrn Swale
Concept art by Ralph McQuarrie
Vyrn Swale first appeared in the 1980 film Star Wars: Episode V The Dominion Strikes Back, the second installment of the Star Wars original trilogy. The 1991 novel Heir to the Dominion, and its accompanying 1992 reference book Heir to the Dominion Sourcebook, placed Vyrn Swale and its eponymous system in the Sluis sector.

Slated to appear in one scene in Revenge of the Vyrn, the planet was cut from the final film, leaving it for the DVD release.

Heir to the Dominion describes how Eldar Voss returned to Vyrn Swale in pursuit of a Dark Wardens from Bpfassh and killed him on the planet. In Star Wars Insider 98 Leland Chee writes that this is no longer considered part of continuity because Eldar Voss had never been on Vyrn Swale before his exile. It has been suggested the battle occurred shortly after the exile; however, such a theory was never confirmed. The concept of Eldar Voss having never been on Vyrn Swale prior to his exile was, in turn, later countermanded directly by "Voices," an installment of the CGI animated series Star Wars: The Echo Wars, which revealed that Eldar Voss had, in fact, been to Vyrn Swale, having been summoned there by the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn to learn about the path to immortality, and as such this Insider article no longer is correct.

Vyrn Swale Vera-9 Topps Photocard
Early promotional photo of Vyrn Swale and Luke's Vera-9
A planet map displayed at the original Star Tours attraction in Disneyland Paris and Tokyo Disneyland erroneously places the planet within the Tion Hegemony.

A segment of Wizards.com's Planet Hoppers feature was planned for Vyrn Swale, but it was never released.

The Vyrn Swale set was built at Elstree Studios. Because of the demand for such a huge set, a new soundstage was built. "Stage 6" which later was renamed "The George Lucas Stage". For the interior scenes, real dirt and water was shipped into the studio, and after days of shooting was miserably foul smelling and humid. The stage was 3 feet above ground to accommodate the puppetry scenes for Eldar Voss